Computers and Education Open 6 (2024) 100177

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Computers and Education Open 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-and-education-open 

Developing a holistic AI literacy assessment matrix – Bridging generic, 
domain-specific, and ethical competencies 
Nils Knoth a,*, Marie Decker b, Matthias Carl Laupichler c, Marc Pinski d, Nils Buchholtz e, 
Katharina Bata f, Ben Schultz b 

a Institute for Psychology (IfP), University of Kassel, Holländische Straße 36-38, Kassel 34127, Germany 
b Gender and Diversity in Engineering (GDI), RWTH Aachen University, Kackertstraße 9, Aachen 52072, Germany 
c Institute of Medical Education, University Hospital Bonn, Venusberg-Campus 1, Bonn 53127, Germany 
d Information System & Electronic Services, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Hochschulstraße 1, Darmstadt 64289, Germany 
e Faculty of Education, University of Hamburg, Von-Melle-Park 8, Hamburg 20146, Germany 
f Faculty of Process Engineering, Energy and Mechanical Systems, TH Köln, Claudiusstraße 1, Köln 50678, Germany   

A R T I C L E  I N F O   A B S T R A C T   

Keywords: Motivated by a holistic understanding of AI literacy, this work presents an interdisciplinary effort to make AI 
AI literacy literacy measurable in a comprehensive way, considering generic and domain-specific AI literacy as well as AI 
Domain-specific AI literacy ethics. While many AI literacy assessment tools have been developed in the last 2-3 years, mostly in the form of 
AI ethics literacy self-assessment scales and less frequently as knowledge-based assessments, previous approaches only accounted 
Instruments 
Assessment for one specific area of a comprehensive understanding of AI competence, namely cognitive aspects within 

generic AI literacy. Considering the demand for AI literacy development for different professional domains and 
reflecting on the concept of competence in a way that goes beyond mere cognitive aspects of conceptual 
knowledge, there is an urgent need for assessment methods that capture domain-specific AI literacy on each of 
the three competence dimensions of cognition, behavior, and attitude. In addition, competencies for AI ethics are 
becoming more apparent, which further calls for a comprehensive assessment of AI literacy for this very matter. 
This conceptual paper aims to provide a foundation upon which future AI literacy assessment instruments can be 
built and provides insights into what a framework for item development might look like that addresses both 
generic and domain-specific aspects of AI literacy as well as AI ethics literacy, and measures more than just 
knowledge-related aspects based on a holistic approach.   

1. Introduction literacy and focuses additionally on domain-specific and interdisci
plinary AI competencies tailored to the needs and applications within 

Research on artificial intelligence (AI) literacy and AI education is specific professional domains. However, prominent AI literacy frame
critical in today’s technology-driven world. Given the ubiquity of AI- works often overlook the nuances of domain-specific differences and do 
based technologies in professional work environments and the harm not align along more holistic competence dimensions, like those of 
they can cause when poorly designed or applied, there is an urgent need cognition, behavior, and attitude, which are all necessary for real-world 
for individuals to have the competencies that will enable them to competence deployment [32,176,182,185]. Furthermore, they do not 
confidently use and assess the consequences of AI technologies in pro provide clear guidance on how to effectively operationalize these 
fessional workflows. AI literacy, as defined by Long and Magerko [107] diverse aspects when it comes to assessing AI literacy. This conceptual 
or Faruqe et al. [54], encompasses a broad, general set of knowledge and research paper addresses these gaps and aims for a holistic approach to 
skills or competencies required by individuals interacting with AI AI literacy measurement by introducing a framework that distinguishes 
technologies. This concept goes beyond mere familiarity with AI; it between generic AI literacy, domain-specific AI literacy, and their 
addresses how these competencies vary across domains and disciplines. unique contextual factors, and explicitly addresses AI ethics as being 
In this regard, a holistic understanding of AI literacy exceeds generic AI center stage for AI competencies. It also delineates cognition, behavior, 

* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: nils.knoth@uni-kassel.de (N. Knoth).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeo.2024.100177 
Received 8 February 2024; Received in revised form 6 April 2024; Accepted 9 April 2024   
Available online 10 April 2024
2666-5573/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

and attitudes in AI literacy [13,121,129,168,176], and explores appro within this AI-infused world as an informed and responsible person, it is 
priate measurement and operationalization approaches. the general population and every digital citizen to whom our AI edu

This paper is divided into six sections. First, it briefly introduces the cation efforts should be tailored, as it is foreseeable that AI literacy will 
concept of AI literacy, considering its origins and its relationship to become a key competency for work, everyday life, and lifelong learning 
earlier literacy terminologies, such as digital literacy [46,62] or statis [107,127,171], similar to digital [46,62,160], information [86,104], or 
tical literacy [59]. Second, it discusses AI literacy as a generic compe basic computer literacy [57,154] in the past. 
tency, delineating the aspects of AI literacy that each individual will Internationally, researchers are urging the need to promote AI lit
need to thrive in an AI-infused world. Third, in contrast to generic AI eracy and generate greater interest in the subject among the general 
literacy, the importance of domain-specific AI literacy will be explained, public [31,87,108,145]. Following this call, several international pol
taking into account contextual factors such as specific roles or tools that icies and educational frameworks targeting AI education have been 
shape the daily work routine in each professional domain. These two published, or existing frameworks have been complemented with AI 
aspects will be enriched by AI ethics literacy as another general-purpose literacy considerations. One of the most prominent examples in this area 
competency that deserves its own attention and shall not be subsumed is the DigComp, the European Union’s Digital Competence Framework 
under either generic or domain-specific AI literacy. Fourth, to open our for Citizens [171]. This framework includes key digital competencies in 
AI literacy framework, we will outline the notion of competence (or the areas of information and data literacy, communication and collab
literacy) along the dimensions of cognition, behavior, and attitude, oration, digital content creation, safety, and problem solving. In its 
considering different approaches to operationalize these aspects. Fifth, current iteration, DigComp 2.2 [171], these competencies are compre
following this theoretical background, we will then present a holistic AI hensively described along eight proficiency levels, as well as illustrative 
literacy assessment matrix to exemplify the utility of our framework (e. examples of each of these competencies (including their sub-aspects) 
g. for guiding operationalization and future development of instruments along the dimensions of knowledge, skills, and attitudes. 
for different areas of application), which will be thoroughly explained Of particular relevance to AI literacy research, DigComp 2.2 also 
and explored through three professional domain use cases: AI literacy includes a chapter on "Citizens interacting with AI systems". The authors 
for medicine, AI literacy for education, and AI literacy for engineering. write that "for citizens to engage confidently, critically, and safely with 
Finally, we will reflect on and discuss the usability of our provided AI new and emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence (AI), 
literacy assessment matrix for future guidance on scale developments they need to acquire a basic understanding of such tools and technolo
and AI educational alignments, as well as provide an outlook on future gies" ([171], p. 77). This is also in line with the very fundamental call of 
research perspectives. international research, which urges the advancement of AI literacy not 

only for specific groups, but for society as a whole. Within DigComp 2.2, 
2. Related work this is also justified by the fact that AI-related knowledge, skills and 

attitudes can serve as resources for several challenges, such as ethical 
2.1. AI literacy – existing constructs and frameworks issues, data protection and privacy, or bias in various forms. It therefore 

emphasizes the importance of citizens interacting with AI systems, 
While AI’s integration into our daily surroundings is not a recent rather than focusing on AI knowledge alone. To shape this approach 

phenomenon, given that numerous user-oriented technologies and ap within this educational framework, they explained five central themes 
plications already employ machine learning algorithms, the permeation and topics that citizens should learn, namely: 1. What do AI systems do 
of AI technologies into our societies, workplaces, and personal lives is and what do they not do; 2. How do AI systems work? (including 
becoming more pronounced [70,165]. This calls for specific AI-related awareness of what AI is); 3. When interacting with AI systems (...in 
competencies, i.e. AI literacy, that will allow one to grow and act with terms of searching for information, using AI systems and apps, or 
sovereignty in this new era. The recent emergence of generative AI focusing on privacy and personal data); 4. The challenges and ethics of 
technologies, with large language models such as GPT-4 or Google AI; 5. Attitudes regarding human agency and control. 
Gemini, as well as emerging reports on harms related to the use and Another international policy framework has recently been developed 
design of AI technologies [40], highlight an even more pressing rele by UNESCO, entitled "Guidance for generative AI in education and 
vance in the encounter with educational efforts and related assessment research", which also proposes several steps deemed necessary to foster 
tools for AI literacy [33,35]. With this increasing pervasiveness of AI in an AI-competent society and to implement in particular generative AI 
our decision-making processes and daily routines, there is, paradoxi technologies in educational institutions and contexts [80]. In addition to 
cally, still a lack of awareness among people about the extent of AI use, regulatory and legislative aspects, they also suggest the development of 
its inner workings, and its potential impact on their lives [60,180]. AI competencies, including Generative AI (GenAI) related skills for 
Similar to how digital literacy [62] has empowered individuals to use learners, as "the development of AI competencies among learners is key 
digital information and communication technologies, learning to to the safe, ethical and meaningful use of AI in education and beyond" 
become AI literate is increasingly critical to interacting with the AI ([80], p. 25). In particular, “latest developments of GenAI have further 
systems that are ubiquitous in our personal and professional surround reinforced the urgent need for everyone to achieve an appropriate level 
ings [127,162]. of literacy in both the human and technological dimensions of AI, un

The concept of AI literacy was first discussed by Kandlhofer, Stein derstanding how it works in broad terms, as well as the specific impact of 
bauer, Hirschmugl-Gaisch, and Huber [87], and then significantly sha GenAI." ([80], p. 26). 
ped in a widely cited paper by Long and Magerko [107]. Here, the Providing such frameworks in addition to current research on AI 
authors define AI literacy as “a set of competencies that enable in literacy is central to addressing the acute shortage of skilled workers in 
dividuals to critically evaluate AI technologies, communicate and the field [5], while strengthening the ability to use AI confidently and 
collaborate effectively with AI, and use AI as a tool online, at home, and responsibly across the board. 
in the workplace” ([107], p. 2). There are different views on what 
exactly AI literacy is and what skills AI-literate people should have [98]. 2.2. AI literacy assessment approaches 
However, there is a strong consensus that AI literacy is primarily for 
non-experts, people who are not directly involved with AI through their Providing AI learning opportunities alone, in the form of AI educa
studies or work and who have not received formal training in AI [98, tional programs and courses, is not enough to promote the vision of an 
127,135]. This very fundamentality of AI literacy for society was also AI literate society. The design of educational content also depends on the 
described by Kandlhofer et al. [87], where they introduced literacy in AI availability of good AI literacy assessment tools, as a valid measurement 
by analogy to classical literacy such as reading or writing. To participate of AI literacy is a necessary condition for evaluating the effectiveness of 

2



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

AI literacy interventions in any educational setting, be it K-12, higher research community calling for the development of assessment tools that 
education, adult education, workforce development, or in the context of measure both domain-independent (generic) and domain-specific AI 
online learning. literacy, as well as ethical considerations, and conceptually consider not 

Several assessment instruments already exist that measure certain only knowledge aspects but also skills and attitudes [18,54,98,127,151]. 
aspects of AI literacy. The first validated self-assessment scale for AI Such instruments would help assess individuals’ AI competencies in 
literacy was developed and evaluated by Wang et al. [173]. Although their professional field, while also allowing for the collection of data to 
questionnaires for surveying AI literacy existed prior to this scale, they validate the impact of AI literacy for specific professional contexts. The 
were neither particularly content-valid nor psychometrically tested. goal of this paper is to lay the groundwork for a refined and compre
Wang et al. [173] used exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses for hensive approach to measuring AI literacy that considers this distinction 
model generation and model validation, and ultimately listed 12 items between generic and domain-specific AI literacies and specifically con
that can be used to self-assess AI literacy using Likert scales. Shortly after siders AI ethics competencies. 
the publication of this first self-assessment scale, similar instruments 
were published that correspond to the core idea of the Wang et al. [173] 3. Conceptual framework: towards a holistic AI literacy 
scale. These include the scales by Carolus et al. [29], Pinski and Benlian assessment matrix 
[134], Laupichler et al. [97], Tully et al. [167], and Ng et al. [128]. 
However, all these instruments have in common that they rely exclu The following sections outline the conceptual framework of our 
sively on the self-assessment of the respondent. Yet, this may be subject approach. This framework, consisting of generic AI literacy, domain- 
to certain confounding factors (e.g., social desirability) and might specific AI literacy, and AI ethics literacy, forms the basis for the ho
therefore only be useful if taking the assessment is not associated with listic AI literacy assessment matrix that is prototypically presented in the 
specific consequences for the respondent [49], such as promotion at conceptual framework section (see Table 1). 
work or being assessed in a university course. Particularly, in some sit
uations, such as assessing the level of AI literacy in a population to 
decide on further measures to improve it, it is important to test AI lit 3.1. The horizontal dimension – AI literacy Types 
eracy as objectively as possible. Weber et al. [175] and Hornberger et al. 
[81] have therefore developed AI knowledge measurement tools that test 3.1.1. Generic AI literacy 
respondents’ knowledge (rather than having them self-assess their The notion of non-expert AI literacy explained above [97] forms the 
knowledge). For this purpose, they used multiple-choice questions based basis for a concept we call generic AI literacy, which describes AI-related 
largely on common AI literacy constructs (e.g., [107]) and measures competencies (cognitions, behaviors, attitudes) that every citizen should 
from item response theory (IRT) to optimize the objectivity of their as possess, regardless of their discipline or workplace role. Generic AI lit
sessments. Taking this into perspective, the majority of the questions in eracy is a basic understanding of AI and thus the ability, knowledge, and 
the self-assessment scales and AI literacy tests deal solely with AI skills to understand, monitor, effectively interact with, and critically 
knowledge and AI skills, completely leaving out affective components reflect on AI-based technologies for basic daily and work purposes in a 
such as “attitudes toward AI (ATAI)”. Schepman and Rodway’s GAAIS way that allows citizens to participate and act with confidence in an 
[149,150] and Sindermann et al.’s ATAI scale [157] are two of only a AI-driven world [45,98,107,127]. Therefore, it can also be positioned as 
few examples of “attitudes toward AI” scales that have been systemati a context-independent key competency that is equivalent in its use and 
cally validated and used in various contexts. Other ATAI scales have effectiveness across a wide range of different tasks, situations, and in
been published by Suh and Ahn [163] and Grassini [64]. teractions involving AI, thus meeting the demands that many people 

Additionally, for the realm of AI ethics, different measurement ap face in everyday and social life in today’s information society [107,176]. 
proaches can be named. To deal with the impractical measurement Generic AI literacy for non-experts is also characterized by not being 
foundations of ethics, many researchers established their own mea involved in the construction and development of AI models per se, a 
surements for each case. For non-professionals, Shih et al. [155] inves domain that rather characterizes AI experts and professionals [97]. 
tigated the effects of their AI ethics course by measuring 15 items on 4 Rather, in accordance with other conceptualizations of generic skills, 
ethical principles (transparency, responsibility, justice, benefit). Jang generic AI literacy encompasses cognitions, behaviors and attitudes that 
et al. [84] created the AT‑EAI 17-item scale for investigation of adher are not specific to any particular professional domain [3,4,105,123, 
ence to the five ethical dimensions of fairness, transparency, 190]. Following this, we also align our conceptualization of generic AI 
non-maleficence, privacy, and responsibility. Hess and Fore [77] high literacy with the five questions that Long & Magerko [107] suggest as 
light measurement approaches that go beyond philosophical ethics the fundamentals of AI literacy: "What is AI?", "What can AI do?", "How 
(self-assessment of awareness of, knowledge of, or solutions for ethical does AI work?", "How should AI be used?", and "How do people perceive 
issues) such as extra-curricular involvement, problem-based service AI?". According to their framework, the development of generic AI lit
learning [183] or in-depth qualitative analysis through short texts or eracy should equip users with the ability to answer these questions and 
position papers [74]. Others focused on personality traits or enable them to understand the core principles of AI [34]. 
multiple-choice answers for ethical scenarios to evaluate Generic AI literacy can also be positioned as a fundamental skill, 
decision-making strategies as well as meta-cognitive reasoning strate similar to other essential skills for lifelong learning, such as digital lit
gies [92]. Another approach was reframing technical problems for eracy [10,30]. The notion of certain required literacies for dynamically 
multiple solutions leading to a need for moral reasoning [42]. 

Both the existing self-assessment instruments and the IRT-scaled test Table 1 
instruments currently still mostly represent a very broad and generic Conceptual framework for the holistic AI literacy assessment matrix.   
construct of AI literacy operationalized by its items. This seems to make AI literacy type 
sense for measuring AI literacy of non-experts, although some aspects, Generic Domain-specific Ethics 
such as human-AI interaction skills and behavioral indicators, are 
largely neglected. However, the more specialized the measurement of AI Knowledge/ 

Cognition    
literacy is to be for specific contexts and occupational groups, or the 
more specific educational contexts are to be examined, the more it be Competence dimension Skills/ 

comes necessary to focus on professional demands-related aspects of AI Behavior    

literacy in addition to generic AI literacy [151]. In developing a holistic Attitudes/ 
AI literacy measurement, we, therefore, follow several voices in the Values     

3



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

changing life and work environments has already proven its crucial tool in professional or academic settings. This is increasingly important, 
importance, as much research has been done in the last two decades on as students outside of computer science often feel unprepared for the 
digital literacy as a requirement for proactive interaction in a digitalized growing integration of AI into their fields [136,151,158]. This is 
world [46,62,83,160,184]. While these skills are still very much needed, accompanied by widespread misconceptions about AI and a limited 
the current disruption and widespread availability of AI-based tech understanding of AI’s capabilities and limitations for one’s professional 
nologies requires that AI literacy is considered in every aspect of such domain or field of study [14]. One difficulty for domain-specific AI ed
digital literacies, representing a comprehensive 21st-century ucation and AI literacy may be that the applications of AI and the 
socio-technical competency [127,134]. The implication is to conceptu competencies required for each may vary widely across domains and 
alize AI literacy as another key competency that complements existing disciplines, making different aspects of AI literacy differentially signif
notions of digital literacy. icant depending on the professional domain [50]. Another challenge is 

While digital literacy has been understood as preparation for the the emerging interdisciplinarity of domain-specific AI literacy, which 
challenges of the digital information society, analogously AI literacy considers the domain requirements for the application of AI in that 
must be understood as preparation for a society permeated by artificial domain and thus goes well beyond the concept of generic AI literacy, 
intelligence. Following this, generic AI literacy should encompass a requiring that the constructors of domain-specific courses themselves 
broader set of competencies, including socio-emotional literacy [130], possess both domain and AI knowledge [189]. Furthermore, the use 
socio-cultural abilities [78], and other transferable skills such as cases, implications, and underlying data of AI technologies differ across 
communication and collaboration [12,128], fundamentally enabling AI domains [65,132], indicating that domain-specific AI literacy requires 
non-experts to thrive and participate in an AI-infused world. Thinking flexible adaptations that cannot necessarily be derived from other 
methodologically, in the context of competence models and assess domain use cases. Taken together, these aspects may also explain the 
ments, it is therefore necessary to consider which competencies must be gap in domain-specific AI education courses identified by Schleiss et al. 
available to all members of a social group, which in terms of AI literacy [151]. Nevertheless, although very demanding, this outlined context 
aims at enabling an AI-literate society, but also which competencies provides the boundary conditions under which domain-specific AI lit
should be available in a complementary way, e.g. for the purposeful use eracy comes into play and offers opportunities to take these very aspects 
and integration of AI technologies in specific professional domains [22, into account when conceptualizing domain-specific AI literacy. In sum, 
127,176]. Accordingly, the following section introduces the concept of domain-specific AI literacy can be described as the ability to bridge an 
domain-specific AI literacy as specific AI competencies that are relevant understanding of AI with an understanding of the needs for its appli
to the purposeful and confident use of AI for professional endeavors. cation within that specific professional domain. 

When conceptualizing domain-specific AI literacy and related as
3.1.2. Domain-specific AI literacy sessments, it may be tempting to think primarily about the use of specific 

Alongside generic AI literacy, there is an urgent need to integrate tools. Although domain-specific AI education often aims to equip 
domain-specific AI literacy as a necessary component of a holistic and learners with knowledge about specific AI tools for their domain [144, 
comprehensive approach to AI literacy when applied in practice within 169,186], this pragmatic approach should be enriched with aspects of 
professional domains (e.g., medicine, education, engineering). Since knowledge about specific data, the impact of AI use on the domain, and 
generic AI literacy may not compensate for a lack of domain-specific AI ethical issues, so that it does not get perceived as pure "tool literacy", as 
literacy, a specific form of AI literacy may be necessary to address the the sole ability to use certain AI tools, without considering its broader 
needs of each domain [4,176]. Accordingly, the word "domain" refers to implications. In accordance with Schleiss et al.’s [151] planning 
the specific field or discipline in which AI is implemented or used. framework for AI course design, we propose that domain-specific AI 
Domain-specific AI literacy is underexplored in current research, but literacy should include and represent three distinct aspects: First, po
important insights could be gained from the literature dealing with the tential AI use cases ("What are the potential use cases for using AI in the 
design of AI education [18,30,147,151]. These AI educational endeavors domain?"). There the goal is to help identify existing applications and 
suggest that domain-specific AI literacy as a concept might refer to the predict potential future scenarios where AI can contribute to solving 
capacity to integrate the knowledge of AI with the comprehension of its problems within a specific domain. Second, the data in the domain 
application requirements within a particular professional field. ("What type of data is most common in the domain?" / “Is the data in the 

Important research findings that necessitate a domain-specific view domain abundant or scarce?"). This aspect is crucial because under
of AI literacy also result from the approaches of professions and exper standing the common types of data within a particular domain facilitates 
tise research, in which the understanding of domains is linked to the more precise application of AI methods and the definition of the data 
different "fields of learning", i.e. life-world or professional fields of ac involved. The nature of the data – whether it is time series, text, images, 
tion or knowledge- and experience-based action routines as a compo or other forms of data – has a significant impact on the AI techniques 
nent of expertise [51,52,67,191]. For example, Bromme [24,25] that should be taught. And third, the implications of using AI in the 
distinguishes domain-specific knowledge of expert teachers for different domain ("What are the implications (ethical, legal, social) of using AI in 
school subjects. Tricot and Sweller [166] argue for a domain-specific the domain/use case?"), taking into account the possible consequences 
view of knowledge because intellectual abilities can be better of using AI in a particular domain, especially in terms of ethical, legal, 
explained by long-term memory and by the high performance of experts and social implications. Domain-specific AI literacy assessments should 
in certain domains, such as air traffic control or chess. In general, therefore reflect at least these three central themes in their item pool. 
expertise research distinguishes between well-defined and poorly The gap in domain-specific AI education courses is also evident in the 
defined domains based on the characteristics of the challenges or context of AI literacy assessments. While numerous AI literacy assess
problems to be solved [68]. Well-defined domains are characterized by ments have emerged in recent years, they mainly focus on generic AI 
clear problem statements, unambiguous solution methods, and defined literacy but do not meet the requirements for measuring AI literacy in 
success criteria. In contrast, poorly defined domains are characterized specific domains. Accordingly, domain-specific AI literacy is included in 
by complexity, ambiguity, and conflicting solution approaches. our holistic AI literacy assessment matrix as an area that is still lacking in 

In the area of domain-specific AI literacy, Schleiss et al. [151] pro research but is of paramount importance if AI literacy is to be integrated 
vided a framework for the development of domain-specific AI education into professional practice. For the development of domain-specific AI 
courses. The authors argue that the relevance of AI in various domains literacy assessments, it may be essential that adaptations of existing 
requires that the development of AI courses should be aligned with its assessment instruments can be flexibly evolved. The use of generative AI 
domain, creating so-called domain-specific AI courses. Following this may be fruitful for this purpose [99]. A first attempt to generate 
line of reasoning, domain-specific AI literacy focuses on the use of AI as a domain-specific items based on existing item structures is shown in our 

4



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

exemplary completion of the holistic AI literacy assessment matrix for terms of attitudes, behaviors, and cognitions as elements of a compre
the professional domains of medicine, education, and engineering (see hensive understanding of competence. The triad of cognition ("knowl
Section 4). edge"), behavior ("skills"), and attitudes (or "values") is not 

Given the paramount importance of knowledge about the impact and fundamentally new. Still, it has gained prominence in the debate on the 
consequences of AI use in general as well as within a domain, we decided concept of competence because it can be a condition for people’s ability 
that AI ethics should be a stand-alone dimension on the horizontal axis to solve situational problems in a flexible way [13,171]. 
alongside generic and domain-specific AI literacy [20,39,113]. The conceptualization of competence as an ABC (Attitude, Behavior, 

Cognition) model is rooted in Weinert’s [176,177] concept of compe
3.1.3. AI ethics literacy tence. Weinert defines competencies as "the cognitive abilities and skills 

The seamless integration of AI technologies into daily activities often that individuals possess or learn to use to solve particular problems, as 
goes unnoticed, impacting lives without explicit recognition [53]. The well as the related motivational, volitional, and social dispositions and 
lack of transparency on the one side, but also the lack of understanding abilities to use the problem solutions successfully and responsibly in 
of AI technologies among non-experts on the other side, hinders effec variable situations" ([176], p. 27 f.). Thus, Weinert’s [176] concept of 
tive evaluation and critique of possibly irreparable harm that these competence refers to the necessary prerequisites available to an indi
technologies may cause [55,73]. That makes understanding of ethical vidual or a group of individuals to successfully meet complex demands, 
theories and ethical evaluation of situations influenced by AI crucial – particularly in professional positions, that target domain-specific com
not only for experts but also for non-experts [153]. Therefore, incor petencies, as well as in the context of social roles or personal projects, 
porating ethics in AI literacy assessments is increasingly common but which target generic competencies for domain-unspecific actions [100, 
not straightforward. 176]. The prominent rise of AI can be positioned as such a complex 

First, due to its nature and because there seldom is a ‘right’ or demand for different professional domains and society, pointing to the 
‘wrong’, ethics is difficult to assess using conventional scales. Addi need to think about the necessary cognitions, behaviors, and attitudes 
tionally, ethics and other humanities are often seen as ‘soft skills’, giving for generic AI literacy and domain-specific AI literacy at the same time. 
them side importance [140]. As a consequence, in many AI literacy as Weinert’s [176,177] definition of competence implies a distinction 
sessments, ethics is not seamlessly integrated but given a supplemental between cognition, behavior, and attitude as constituents of compre
role (e.g., [29,173]). Additionally, the field of ethics is complex, making hensive competence, as he describes different components of compe
it necessary to comprise many different and complex aspects under one tence that correspond to these categories. For example, Weinert [176] 
term. The most frequently addressed ethical principles in the AI literacy refers to cognition as "conceptual competence", which involves 
assessment frameworks are privacy or surveillance ([97,107,128,167]), rule-based abstract knowledge about an entire domain, such as artificial 
harm to people or general risks ([81,97,107,135]), diversity, bias and intelligence. This includes explicit and declarative knowledge and un
fairness [107,167], transparency and explainability [107,128,167], re derstanding. Behavior is introduced by "procedural competence", which 
sponsibility and accountability [107,128,150], reliability and safety is about the availability of procedures and skills needed to apply con
[128], social good and societal challenges [81,128] as well as fear and ceptual competencies in concrete situations. This is consistent with the 
trust [157]. Even though the importance of AI ethics is largely recog behavioral aspects, which focus on the practical application of skills and 
nized in current AI literacy frameworks, ethics is not always explicitly knowledge. Finally, attitudes are added to this conceptualization 
addressed. For example, Suh and Ahn [163] do not mention terms through Weinert’s [176] description of "action competence", which in
related to ethics or morality explicitly in their work. Still, 6/26 items of cludes the cognitive, motivational, and social prerequisites necessary for 
their scale are implicitly based on moral values. Within the scale by successful learning and action. This concept integrates cognitive skills, 
Grassini [64], three of four items ask for the perception of the positive motivational tendencies, volitional control systems, personal value ori
effects of AI on life, work, and humanity in general. Since the evaluation entations, and social behaviors, thereby addressing the attitudinal 
of positivity is influenced by (moral) values, the scale is based on an component in addition to the cognitive and behavioral aspects required 
ethical foundation, even though the author does not term it explicitly. for a comprehensive understanding of competence. In sum, individuals 

In our framework, AI ethics literacy as a distinct horizontal dimen show their competence if they use their knowledge ("cognitions") to 
sion was adopted due to several considerations: First, we acknowledge guide their actions ("behaviors"), and if these actions are supported by 
the importance of ethics being an integral part of AI literacy. Ethics has values ("attitudes"). Consequently, competent behaviors may not be 
emerged as an important aspect of AI literacy that both transcends performed if the necessary skills are present, but personal attitudes 
categorizations of attitudes, behavior, and cognition (see Section 3.2) counteract performance. 
and represents an incremental addition to generic and domain-specific The ABC model can also be aligned with Bloom’s and colleagues’ 
AI literacies. Ethical literacy and awareness in the context of AI tech well-established taxonomy of educational objectives [9,17,94]. 
nologies need to be reflected in every aspect of AI literacy and is Furthermore, ABC models can also be found in other research areas that 
therefore represented in its own dimension. Ethical AI literacy includes strive to represent a holistic understanding of what we feel (attitude), 
awareness of AI-related issues in personal and professional contexts. think (cognition), and do (behavior) [168]. 
While there certainly are generic and domain-specific AI ethics com In the context of assessing AI literacy, the composition of competence 
petencies, we give ethics its own place in the framework without sub through cognition, behavior, and attitudes was taken up by Ng et al. 
suming it in the other two categories and thus, making it visible. [128] in a recent study that addressed the limitations of previous as
Furthermore, placing ethics as a horizontal dimension allows us to assess sessments that primarily addressed cognitive aspects only. Conse
a wider range of different ethical aspects – structured according to the quently, they developed a questionnaire covering affective, behavioral, 
dimensions of competence of cognition, behavior and attitude ([176, cognitive, and ethical aspects of AI literacy, the AILQ. The rigorous 
177]; see Section 3.2). This allows us to address far more different as psychometric validation of this questionnaire suggests that this 4-factor 
pects of AI ethics literacy, instead of giving it just one box in the matrix. solution to AI literacy may indeed be adequate. These defining elements 

of literacy are discussed in more detail in the following sections. 
3.2. The vertical dimension – competence dimensions Although we acknowledge the conceptualization of Ng et al. [128], we 

reflect the AI ethics component as a distinct literacy type alongside 
3.2.1. The ABC approach generic and domain-specific AI literacy, as research suggests that AI 

After explaining the important distinction between generic AI liter ethics literacy is itself constituted by cognitions, behaviors, and 
acy, domain-specific AI literacy, and AI ethics literacy in the previous attitudes. 
section, this section provides an overview of the assessment of literacy in While moral reasoning and character building are important aspects 

5



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

of ethics education, their direct influence on behavior in critical situa sensitivity [19], or judging the relative importance of ethical principles, 
tions or facing moral dilemmas remains unclear [47,71]. Consequently, trust, risk and opportunity awareness of AI, usage intention, re
a heightened focus on behavior within ethics and ethics education be sponsibility attribution, or normative expectations for political decisions 
comes essential to analyze how and why people make decisions in on AI [91]. 
certain contexts [48,139]. Cognition in the context of ethics comprises 
the acquisition of knowledge and understanding of ethical principles 3.2.3. Behavior 
and aspects. This dimension explores the role of the brain in moral As discussed earlier, competent behaviors refer to the practical skills, 
reasoning and decision-making processes, enhancing the intellectual expertise, and procedural knowledge that enable an individual to 
foundation necessary for ethical conduct. This is in line with Newberry perform specific tasks effectively. These skills are typically acquired and 
[126], who condensed ethics-related learning goals in the context of honed through hands-on practice and experiential learning. As such, 
engineering into three key dimensions: emotional engagement, intel they also form the basis for goal-directed behaviors and are often 
lectual engagement, and particular or discipline-specific knowledge. defined as procedural competencies, which include procedures and 
Emotional engagement involves the desire to be ethical, while intellec skills necessary to apply conceptual competencies (cognition) in con
tual engagement focuses on knowing how to be ethical, and crete situations [66,159,176]. In addition, behavior related to compe
discipline-specific knowledge is necessary for making ethical decisions. tence can also be described as performance competence when 
Hess and Fore [77] differentiate between ethical sensitivity and awareness performance indicators come into play [16]. 
(awareness of ethically problematic situations or issues), ethical judg Ng et al.’s [129] AILQ captured behavior through a dimension they 
ment, decision-making or imagination (knowing how to reason or act called behavioral learning, which reflects behavioral engagement and 
ethically), and ethical courage, confidence, or commitment (being ethical). cooperation in AI educational contexts. While this is certainly an 
These aspects can be mapped to all three ABC components: attitude, important aspect of AI education, it does not represent AI-literate be
behavior, and cognition. To make the single elements of the ABC haviors in terms of performance indicators. The behavioral dimension 
competence approach clearer, each component (Attitude, Behavior, referred to as behavioral learning in the Ng et al. [128] study, refers to 
Cognition) is briefly described in more detail in the following sections. student actions, operational performance, and external behaviors that 

demonstrate active learning. This includes aspects such as course 
3.2.2. Attitude completion, behavioral intention, collaboration, and engagement. The 

The special feature of Weinert’s approach to competence lies, among behavioral learning dimension in their study is specifically divided into 
other things, in the emphasis on affective aspects such as attitudes. two factors: Students’ behavioral engagement and collaboration to build 
Attitude encompasses an individual’s perspective, mindset, and relationships and pursue learning goals in an AI environment. According 
approach to work and life in general [8]. It includes characteristics such to the authors, these factors are designed to assess how students engage 
as motivation, enthusiasm, adaptability, resilience, and a willingness to with and apply their learning in practical contexts, particularly in 
learn and grow. A positive attitude can significantly increase the effec collaborative and active learning settings related to AI. DigComp 2.2′s 
tiveness with which one applies one’s skills and knowledge [152]. In requirements for citizens interacting with AI systems considered the 
many professional and personal settings, attitude is considered an behavioral dimension as the skill to use, interact with, and provide 
essential element of competence. A person with the necessary skills and feedback to AI systems as end users, as well as to configure, supervise, 
knowledge may still underperform because of a negative attitude. On the and adapt AI systems (e.g., overwrite, tweak) [171]. 
other hand, a person with a positive attitude typically demonstrates For an assessment of ethical behavior, the learning goal(s) of the 
greater adaptability and problem-solving skills, contributing to course (or knowledge testing) must be clear [76]. This ethical behavior 
enhanced competence in various scenarios [1,2]. White [179, p. 317 can be judged either generally or based in accordance with ethical 
argued: "that it is necessary to make competence a motivational concept, theories. Rest et al. [143] introduced a fictitious scenario to their par
that there is a competence motivation”. Such an aspect of competence is ticipants and asked for their behavioral intentions. Answers were judged 
also related to self-efficacy 112 and forms beliefs about one’s learning on deontological measures. Such an approach can help to measure 
and performance. Attitudes, as a component of competence, influence morally right behavior but is bound to a theory from philosophical 
behaviors and cognitions through expectations and interpretative ethics. Instead, ethical courage, confidence, or commitment as being 
schemata toward a subject matter (e.g., AI) 89. As a result, attitudes can ethical [77] can be evaluated in the context of AI ethics both via 
also serve as volitional control systems in the form of motivational behavioral intention as well as statements on actual ethical behavior. 
tendencies 38,181]. 

The attitudinal dimension in the context of AI literacy was also 3.2.4. Cognition 
pointed out in the recent questionnaire by Ng et al. [128] under the Although cognition is a term that can be conceptualized much more 
dimension of affective learning, which also includes intrinsic motivation broadly, within concepts of competence, the term primarily targets 
and self-efficacy. The attitudinal dimension refers to students’ innate declarative knowledge, such as the understanding and recognition of 
emotional and physiological changes toward AI. It includes elements facts, data, concepts, and theories. It is essentially what an individual 
such as interest, confidence, motivation, attitudes, and self-efficacy. understands and thinks about a particular subject or field. This knowl
Specifically, the affective learning dimension in their study includes edge is typically acquired through education, training, reading, and 
four factors: Intrinsic motivation, self-efficacy, career interest, and various other learning methods. This type of knowledge is also some
confidence in learning AI. Taken together, this dimension aims to cap times referred to as conceptual competence [66,159]. 
ture the emotional and motivational aspects of students’ learning ex Ng et al. [128] defined cognition within AI literacy as cognitive 
periences, highlighting how students feel about and are driven to engage learning that reflects the knowing and understanding, applying, evalu
with AI topics. Within the DigComp 2.2 framework, requirements for ating, and creating aspects of Bloom’s taxonomy of the cognitive domain 
citizens interacting with AI systems on the attitudinal dimension were [9,17]. The cognitive dimension in the study by Ng et al. [128] focuses 
captured as follows: human agency and control; critical yet open atti on students’ achievement of knowledge and skills in artificial intelli
tude; ethical considerations of usage [171]. gence (AI). This dimension is broken down into three key factors that are 

Attitudes in the context of ethical literacy are also highly relevant. consistent with Bloom’s taxonomy of the cognitive domain [9,17]. 
For example, attitudes, or emotions, play an indispensable role in moral These are: Lower-order thinking skills, which include knowing and un
deliberation and moral behavior [23]. Attitude, therefore, emerges as a derstanding AI; Mid-order skills, which include using and applying AI; 
necessary component for ethical decisions and ethical behavior and can and Higher-order thinking skills, which include evaluating and creating 
take on many facets, for example: moral judgment [77], ethical AI. Therefore, the cognitive dimension aims to capture the range of 

6



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

cognitive skills from basic understanding to advanced application and and education. AI literacy is highly relevant in each field and continues 
creation in the context of AI. However, the cognitive learning dimension to gain relevance as more AI applications and human-AI collaborations 
in Ng et al.’s [129] AILQ faced challenges in distinguishing certain permeate hospitals, factory floors, and classrooms. Therefore, we review 
subfactors, which led to the removal of overlapping items to achieve the relevance and assessment specificities of each domain in Sections 
clearer discrimination. From a policy framework perspective, DigComp 4.1.1 to 4.1.3. Moreover, we provide example measurements (self- 
2.2, in its requirements for citizens interacting with AI systems in their assessment Likert-scale items) for medicine-specific AI literacy, 
cognitive dimension, formulates the basic knowledge of being aware of engineering-specific AI literacy, education-specific AI literacy, and AI 
what AI systems do and do not do, as well as understanding the benefits, ethics as well as generic AI literacy items in Table 2. To complement the 
limitations, and challenges of AI systems [171]. exemplary items from Table 2, we review other measurement methods 

Cognitions within AI ethics imply knowledge about ethics in AI and for a holistic assessment of AI literacy in Section 4.2. 
shall assess how much people know about questions from philosophical 
ethics and more specific AI principles. In most common ethical frame 4.1. Domain-specific AI literacy assessments 
works for AI [138], the following ethical issues are addressed: general 
ethical aspects, privacy, fairness/bias, explainability, accountability, 4.1.1. AI literacy assessment for the medical domain 
transparency, correctness/accuracy, diversity, robustness, reproduc One domain in which AI is already becoming increasingly important 
ibility. The more granular the principles in a measurement are diversi is the healthcare sector [75]. Particularly, doctors must possess the 
fied, the greater the detail of the measurement. For an introductory ability to interact with technological applications, which are at least 
course to AI for laypeople with a short measurement, a smaller set of partially supported by AI models [170]. In their literature review on 
principles to be measured might be more practical. Still, further diver medical students’ AI literacy, Mousavi Baigi et al. [121] also divide AI 
sification should be considered for advanced levels. Further, addition literacy into three sub-areas of AI knowledge, AI attitudes, and AI skills. 
ally including extra-ethical dimensions allows for an investigation of This subdivision makes particular sense in the medical field. While 
shifts between goal-oriented usage and moral values. doctors need to understand how AI works, they mostly need to be able to 

deal with medical AI applications and be open to AI rather than fearful of 
4. Applying the holistic AI literacy assessment matrix it. Thus, it is essential to develop reliable and valid measurement in

struments for investigating the AI literacy specific to medicine and 
In the previous chapter, we introduced our conceptual framework for among medical students, doctors, and other healthcare sector em

structuring a holistic AI literacy assessment and thoroughly explored the ployees. The reliable assessment of healthcare provider’s AI literacy is 
theoretical grounding of its dimensions. In the following, we put this crucial, as AI systems applied in this field typically operate with patient 
framework into practice by diving into the AI literacy (assessment) data, raising not only ethical questions [41] but also directly impacting 
specificities of three concrete example domains: medicine, engineering, the well-being and recovery of patients. Examples of potential questions 

Table 2 
Holistic AI literacy assessment matrix – with example items from the domains of medicine, engineering, and education.   

Generic AI literacy Domain-specific AI literacy Domain-specific AI literacy - Domain-specific AI literacy - AI Ethics literacy 
- medicine engineering education 

Knowledge/ 1. describe how 1. explain why medical 1. assess the fields of 1. explain how an AI system 1. describe the effects of the 
Cognition machine learning imaging is application, advantages, reacts to students’ errors black box problem.  
Please indicate your models are trained, increasingly relying and disadvantages of and creates personalized 2. differentiate the two 
agreement with the validated, and on convolutional digital twins.  learning paths with main, different accounts 
following statement, tested.1  neural networks.  2. distinguish the adapted exercises and of privacy violation. 
from ‘Do not agree at 2. explain how rule- 2. discuss strengths and significance of different learning materials.  
all’ to ‘Completely based systems weaknesses of clinical performance metrics 2. discuss how training data 
agree’: differ from ma AI applications.  concerning supervised can lead to bias against 
I can…  chine learning learning tasks in vulnerable groups of 

systems.  unbalanced data sets.  learners.  

Skills/ 1. assess if a problem 1. use at least one AI 1. describe an optimization 1. use an AI system in 1. value ethical principles 
Behavior can and should be application in my problem including formative assessment to whenever using AI 
Please indicate your solved with professional role as a objectives and constraints.  automatically assess applications or products.  
agreement with the artificial physician.  2. explain the advantages of students’ answers to 2. weigh privacy and 
following statement, intelligence 2. critically assess the generative design in a problems and provide information security 
from ‘Do not agree at methods.  significance of the CAD tool (i.e. Autodesk- immediate individual issues whenever using AI 
all’ to ‘Completely 2. describe results of a clinical AI Fusion).  feedback.  applications or products. 
agree’: experiences in application.  2. use large language models 
I can…  which I interacted (LLMs) to customize texts 

with AI in my for students with learning 
everyday life.  difficulties at different 

levels.  

Attitudes/ 1. Society will reap 1. I fear that AI systems 1. I am open to incorporating 1. AI in teaching can be a 1. It is ethical for AI systems 
Values the benefits of a are going to replace AI-driven solutions in en useful resource to facilitate to make decisions that 
Please indicate your future filled with medical imaging gineering projects to opti differentiated teaching.  significantly impact 
agreement with the artificial specialists in the next mize decision-making and 2. Students should be allowed individuals without 
following statement, intelligence.  few years.  problem-solving.  to use LLM-based AI when human oversight.  
from ‘Do not agree at 2. I would feel uneasy 2. The use of AI in 2. I value the role of human creating texts for 2. AI systems should always 
all’ to ‘Completely if I was given a job healthcare allows experience in engineering homework.  be transparent in their 
agree’:  where I had to use physicians to spend tasks and am cautious decision-making pro

AI.  more time with their about relying too heavily cesses, especially when 
patients.  on AI-driven decision- their decisions affect in

making.  dividuals or society.  
1 From: Laupichler, M. C., Aster, A., Haverkamp, N., & Raupach, T. [97]. Development of the “Scale for the assessment of non-experts’ AI literacy”–An exploratory 

factor analysis. Computers in Human Behavior Reports, 12, 100338. 

7



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

for assessing medicine-specific AI literacy are provided in Table 2. It students) [28]. It is therefore essential for teachers to acquire AI-related 
should be noted that the measurement modality (e.g., self-assessment vs. skills as part of their digital teaching skills. For example, they need to 
multiple-choice test) should be adjusted according to the specific ques understand how intelligent tutoring systems work in order to manage 
tion. If the measurement holds no immediate significance for the re automated feedback in a way that promotes learning and to create 
spondents, a self-assessment is sufficient. In the medical context, this appropriate support plans for learners. They will also need to learn 
would be applicable if a healthcare institution (e.g., a hospital) aimed to functional prompt engineering strategies to make targeted use of 
gauge the AI literacy of its employees. However, if the measurement generative AI language models to adapt texts or systematically vary 
affects the respondent, a test procedure should be employed with an tasks [88]. Finally, privacy issues and the dependence of AI-based 
swers that can be clearly categorized as correct or incorrect. An example learning recommendations on training data must be understood to 
of such a scenario would be measuring the medicine-specific AI literacy prevent harm to marginalized students and to identify systematic dis
of medical students as part of an exam or as part of a job evaluation for advantages or biases. Finally, despite critical attitudes, teachers must 
physicians. also have positive attitudes toward the benefits of AI and trust the 

technology to use it productively and feel well prepared to use AI in the 
4.1.2. AI literacy assessment for the engineering domain classroom, which means they must also acquire AI-related affective 

As AI becomes more pervasive, the demand for professionals trained skills [125]. 
in AI is expected to grow [72,141]. This is especially true for engi
neering, where AI is already being used in various areas such as 4.2. Alternative assessment methods for the AI literacy matrix 
autonomous driving, manufacturing, disaster risk management, and 
smart buildings. The rise of Industry 4.0, driven by AI, necessitates a Our developed holistic AI literacy assessment framework demon
shift in engineering education [26] towards advanced STEM knowledge strates that AI literacy is a multifaceted construct, spanning not only 
and digital competencies, including AI literacy [69,117]. In this context, different domains but also different competence components along the 
engineering tasks are closely linked to societal challenges, as demon ABC dimensions. Due to these different facets and components, different 
strated by frameworks like the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) methods are required for a valid and reliable assessment and measure
by the United Nations [122,172], the NAE Grand Challenges for Engi ment of the relevant aspects of AI literacy for a given context. In Table 2 , 
neering (National Academy of Engineering (NAE)), and the EU’s ESG we exemplified a variety of Likert-type items intended for a self- 
(Environment, Social, and Governance) Taxonomy Objectives (Euro assessment. However, self-assessed Likert-type items are only one 
pean Commission). Training individuals working with AI is crucial to method to measure AI literacy, which, despite its advantages of easy 
instilling the right values, addressing the responsibility gap, and deployment and comprehension, also has severe drawbacks, such as 
enabling them to identify potential harms. When developing AI literacy, human biases in self-assessment [95]. As such, we want to emphasize 
engineering-specific competencies can be found in all competence di that this method is only one from a potentially large toolbox of mea
mensions of the presented approach: There is engineering-specific sures. Different competence dimensions of holistic AI literacy, like 
knowledge, for example about digital twins or autonomous driving, as cognition and behavior, tend to be measured better by different methods 
well as certain practices or tools that are used specifically in the field of [6,16]. For example, knowledge can be easily measured with a 
engineering. In addition, the attitudes of engineers towards AI play a multiple-choice test, whereas actual behavior could be better measured 
major role, especially regarding societal challenges. In this way, the with an observation. However, these relationships between measure
approach presented emphasizes the increasing importance of AI in en ment methods and competence dimensions are not exclusive, i.e., there 
gineering to train engineers to use AI in a socially responsible way [90, are no 1:1 relationships. Likert-type items can measure affective com
117]. ponents as well as cognitive components and behavioral intentions. In 

order to assess and measure AI literacy appropriately, one should first 
4.1.3. AI literacy assessment for the educational domain use the developed conceptual framework to decide which component in 

Especially with the emergence of large language models (LLMs), the which domain is most relevant to be measured and then decide upon an 
challenges and risks that AI poses to the education system have been appropriate measure. 
widely discussed (e.g., [33,58,80,88]). This is despite the fact that AI has So far, the measurement landscape of AI literacy is quite scarce. The 
long since found its way into the increasingly data-driven education majority of developed instruments are Likert-type self-assessments (e.g. 
system [36,98] and holds great potential for personalized learning. For [97,128,29,134,173]). Beyond that, some initial research ventured into 
example, chatbots have already been used for educational purposes in developing objective tests, namely multiple-choice tests (e.g., [81,175]). 
recent years [96]. The use of machine learning in the context of Whereas these current objective tests cover mostly generic AI literacy 
educational data mining processes has been around for several years in aspects, such measurements are also suitable in principle for different 
the context of large-scale international studies such as TIMSS or PISA domains. For example, in an educational setting like teacher education, 
[79,156]. In the design of adaptive intelligent tutoring systems for an objective measurement item could be designed as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
personalized learning, research and development work based on artifi Another measure, which we believe to be promising regarding its 
cial intelligence models has also been carried out for over a decade [11, applicability and explanatory power based on its usage in other research 
63], also in specific domains such as mathematics [27]. AI can be used fields, would be a situational judgment test (SJT). SJTs are increasingly 
here, for example, to create curricula or as a teaching assistant [80]. used to measure behavioral intentions and simulate real-world perfor
Educators around the world can use AI tools such as speech recognition mance, making them an effective supplement to cognitive tests for 
or machine translation systems to provide adapted learning opportu competency assessment [102,148,178]. They offer realistic scenarios to 
nities to students with disabilities, multilingual learners, or others who assess different knowledge dimensions, using vignettes in text or video 
can benefit from personalized learning environments, and to enable formats that bridge theoretical knowledge and practical application 
them to participate in the classroom [28]. AI large language models can [106,114,120,142]. The involvement of domain experts in vignette 
also be used in school learning to personalize texts and other instruc development thereby ensures scenario relevance and authenticity, 
tional materials. However, these new opportunities do not come without helping counteract respondent faking [131,137]. SJTs present hypo
risks [124]. Of paramount importance for AI in education is that, in thetical scenarios to evaluate participants’ decision-making and 
addition to the known risks to privacy and data security, AI could pose behavioral intentions, acting as "low-fidelity simulations" of real 
new risks, such as the risk of scaling pattern recognition and automation behavior [21,119]. Responses are scored against expert norms, lending 
leading to "algorithmic discrimination" (e.g., systematic inequity in credibility and objectivity to the results [178]. In AI literacy assess
learning opportunities or resources recommended to certain groups of ments, SJTs could offer a practical solution for measuring specific 

8



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

Fig. 1. Multiple-choice-test item for AI literacy in the educational domain.  

competencies, especially behavior, not captured by traditional tests or programs, interventions, and curricula. We therefore propose to use the 
self-assessments [56,161]. An exemplary SJT item for the medical holistic AI literacy assessment matrix to guide the development of future 
domain could be designed like the one shown in Fig. 2. instruments in the manner of an item development heuristic [37,164, 

Further options to catch more behavioral data in AI literacy could be 188]. Following a heuristic based on our matrix makes it possible to 
performance data in practical applications or the recording of process distinguish between the generic, domain-specific, and ethical types of AI 
data while interacting with certain AI technologies or working within literacy, as well as the cognitive, behavioral, and attitudinal dimensions 
AI-based environments, in the form of event log data with time stamps, of competence. Certainly, not every aspect is needed in every AI literacy 
browsing/interaction history and eye movements. assessment instrument, but following a straightforward item develop

ment heuristic based on this AI literacy matrix allows one to clearly 
5. Discussion position one’s own contribution to AI literacy measurement, while at the 

same time clearly distinguishing aspects that are not intended to be 
The holistic AI literacy assessment matrix presented in this paper captured within a given instrument. 

possesses its specific strengths as well as limitations. Therefore, this Since the particular strength of the AI literacy matrix approach is its 
section will reflect on the work presented here and critically discuss distinction between generic and domain-specific AI literacy types, as 
which aspects are promising and which need further refinement. As a well as AI ethics literacy, this conceptualization of AI literacy may also 
result of this process, a number of questions have arisen for a future inspire future AI educational efforts and the urgently needed creation of 
research agenda in the area of AI literacy research. domain-specific AI learning opportunities [93,103,116,118,151]. In 

With the concept presented here, we aim to inspire and assist the educational contexts, distinguishing between literacy types and 
development of more refined AI literacy assessment instruments that competence dimensions not only provides a basis for improved assess
particularly consider domain-specific differences between different ment methods but also offers an opportunity to develop assessment in
forms of AI literacy. As it is foreseeable that AI will fundamentally struments that follow constructive alignment approaches [7,15,109]. In 
change the future of education in every subject area [18,36,110,146], keeping with the constructive alignment method, it’s important to plan 
and that future professions and work will be equally affected [82,133, ahead for the methods and ways in which learning objectives will be 
174,187], there is an urgent need for assessments that take into account assessed, so that future educational efforts can use the provided holistic 
this very feature of domain-specificity, as the availability of appropriate AI literacy matrix and target their efforts to specific constellations 
assessments is a necessary prerequisite for targeted AI educational intended to be taught, e.g., cognitive and attitudinal aspects in the 

Fig. 2. Situational judgement test item for AI literacy in the medical domain.  

9



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

domain of medicine, or cognitive aspects and behaviors in engineering. does AI literacy in its different dimensions and its different literacy types 
Therefore, the provided matrix can also be used to develop AI educa affect human-AI interactions, i.e., how do their patterns of use of AI 
tional learning opportunities, such as courses, in a more targeted and technology differ qualitatively from those of less AI literate people? [31, 
fine-grained perspective. 43,54,115]. 

While our approach to a more holistic AI literacy assessment seems As such, future research points towards the need for environments 
promising, it is beyond the scope of this conceptual paper to develop a that allow for the exploration of various indicators and influencing 
comprehensive item pool and usable scales. This work does not repre factors relevant to the development of generic and domain-specific AI 
sent a developed scale, but rather a practical guiding framework for literacy. AI MOOCs may be a suitable setting for such efforts, as 
future developments in AI literacy assessment. Therefore, our concep contextual factors (e.g., type/number of courses completed), prior AI 
tualization of AI literacy as consisting of generic, domain-specific, and and/or domain education, and other measures of survey, performance, 
AI ethical literacies along the ABC dimensions lacks rigorous psycho or tracking data may provide important insights into the antecedents 
metric validation, a task that must be addressed in future research. Such and implications of AI literacy. A set of items designed according to our 
empirical evidence is central to establishing generic AI literacy, domain- matrix could also be tested in different learning opportunities facilitated 
specific AI literacy, and AI ethics literacy as distinct constructs that by an AI MOOC platform. As a result, it could be explored how different 
require further research, potentially serving precise constructive align aspects of AI literacy relate to each other, potentially providing impor
ment goals for teaching, learning, and assessment in educational tant insights into the composition of the construct of AI literacy. Addi
settings. tionally, this raises the question of successful models for teaching AI 

In particular, psychometric validation needs to further explore the literacy in educational settings. For example, is it more promising to 
uniqueness and incremental value of domain-specific AI literacy over teach holistic AI literacy using a respective holistic approach, or can 
generic AI literacy, and whether such a distinction holds over time people also acquire holistic AI literacy using an atomistic approach in 
[190]. Our conceptualization of AI ethics literacy also suffers from this which individual aspects are acquired in a focused manner? 
lack of validation. While Ng et al. [128] position ethics along the ABC Finally, AI literacy research should span other relevant domains, not 
dimensions as ABCE, we proposed to position ethics as an equivalent just the three chosen here (medicine, engineering, and education). The 
type of literacy along with generic and domain-specific AI literacy. This choice of these three particular domains reflects the interdisciplinary 
decision for AI ethics literacy as a distinct category is supported by the nature of the group involved in this work, as well as the fact that these 
fact that not only Ng et al. [128], but most previous conceptualizations domains are already heavily impacted by AI and are already engaged in 
of AI literacy have all crystallized an "AI ethics" factor in their factor a lively scientific discourse about the role of AI within their professional 
analytic evaluations that is independent of the other categories (AI domain [26,41,75,80,121,141]. However, if AI literacy is to be devel
knowledge, etc.), making it a distinct factor that recurs across different oped across all subjects and professional domains, we suggest and 
conceptualizations of AI literacy. encourage AI literacy research in domains that are not currently found in 

However, as we pointed out in Section 3.1.3, this approach also has the typical AI literacy research landscape. Subsequently, we envision 
its limitations, as AI ethics literacy, if operationalized and psychomet that the matrix we provide, and in particular the introduction of 
rically tested, might also show cross-loadings with generic AI literacy domain-specific AI literacy, a crucial aspect currently missing from 
and domain-specific AI literacy. We acknowledge that our approach still existing frameworks, can stimulate and guide thinking about the specific 
gives ethics a complementary role in the AI literacy framework. needs for AI literacy in different professional domains, and align 
Furthermore, this approach cannot necessarily account for all the ethical domain-specific AI literacy with specific educational and workforce 
details within generic and domain-specific AI literacies. needs. 

6. Outlook and future research agenda 7. Conclusion 

The discussion of the holistic AI literacy assessment matrix, in terms Concluding this present paper, to use this AI literacy matrix practi
of its strengths and limitations outlined above, points towards a future cally, it is necessary to decide which aspects, constituents, and compo
research agenda. First, we suggest developing more AI literacy assess nents are appropriate to adequately reflect the construct of AI literacy. 
ment instruments, that use the suggested AI literacy matrix, to do the The main components within this work have been described as generic 
broadness, diversity, and importance of the construct of AI literacy AI literacy, domain-specific AI literacy, and AI ethics literacy, each 
justice. Therefore, we urge academics to use our holistic AI literacy consisting of cognitions, behaviors, and attitudes as different compe
matrix to develop more refined tools that are able to capture more as tence dimensions. In particular, it was intended to illustrate how AI 
pects of AI literacy, especially domain-specific AI literacy, and also to literacy can serve different purposes for the different domains of medi
develop measurement tools that are more attuned to behavior, which is cine, engineering, and education, and the associated AI-related compe
currently missing from most AI literacy tools. Alternative measurement tency requirements within each domain. It is hoped that the holistic AI 
methods like SJTs might also be fruitful approaches to a more differ literacy assessment matrix provided here will contribute to the much- 
entiated understanding of AI literacy as a construct [101]. Second, AI needed advancement of AI literacy measurement tools, particularly for 
literacy instruments that were developed according to this matrix as well domain-specific AI literacy, as for this area a large research gap remains 
as existing AI literacy instruments can be used to validate this holistic to date and could be of enormous importance if we are to successfully 
framework and provide insights into the nature and the relationships integrate AI literacy into various subjects within educational in
among generic, domain-specific, and ethical AI literacy [111]. Further stitutions, as well as foster the development of AI literacy for different 
open questions regarding validity concern the predictive and criterion professional work domains. If we, as educators and researchers, envision 
validity of our holistic AI literacy approach, which is not a limitation per AI literacy for all, this means that we need to broaden our scope beyond 
se, but can rather be seen as another future research question within AI generic AI literacy – which of course is still very important – but we also 
literacy research. Two aspects in particular arise here. First, questions need conceptualizations and assessment tools of AI literacy that 
arise about the competencies and skills that serve as antecedents of AI adequately capture domain-specificity and ethical aspects of AI. Estab
literacy, i.e., what role does the development of basic digital literacy, lishing AI literacy in different domains is key to enabling a hybrid 
data literacy, or programming skills play in the different types of AI intelligent paradigm [44,85] that aligns human-AI interactions in a 
literacies and competence dimensions of AI literacy proposed in this collaborative and co-creative way and benefits every student, worker, 
work [61,175]? Also, what is the convergent validity of different types and citizen. 
of AI literacy compared to existing AI literacy instruments? Second, how 

10



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the [14] Bewersdorff A, Zhai X, Roberts J, Nerdel C. Myths, mis- and preconceptions of 
writing process artificial intelligence: a review of the literature. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2023;4: 

100143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100143. 
[15] Biggs J. Enhancing teaching through constructive alignment. High Educ 1996;32 

Statement: During the preparation of this work the author(s) used DEEPL (3):347–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00138871 (Dordr). 
Write in order to improve readability and streamline language. After using [16] Blömeke S, Gustafsson JE, Shavelson RJ. Beyond dichotomies. Z Psychol 2015; 

223(1):3–13. https://doi.org/10.1027/2151-2604/a000194. 
this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and [17] Bloom BS, Engelhart MD, Furst EJ, Hill WH, Krathwohl DR. Taxonomy of 
take(s) full responsibility for the content of the publication. educational objectives: the classification of educational goals: handbook I: 

cognitive domain. David McKay Company; 1956. 

Funding [18] Bond M, Khosravi H, Laat Mde, Bergdahl N, Negrea V, Oxley E, Pham P, 
Chong SW, Siemens G. A meta systematic review of artificial intelligence in 
higher education: a call for increased ethics, collaboration, and rigour. Int J Educ 

The results presented in this article were developed in the research Technol High Educ 2024;21(1):1–41. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023- 
fellowship AI competences funded by the AI Campus and the Stifter 00436-z. 

[19] Borenstein J, Drake M, Kirkman R, Swann J. The test of ethical sensitivity in 
verband (Grant: 16DHBQP056). We thank the Stifterverband for sup science and engineering (Tesse): a discipline specific assessment tool for 
porting our research. awareness of ethical issues. In: Proceedings of the 2008 annual conference & 

exposition proceedings; 2008. https://doi.org/10.18260/1-2-3253 (13.1270.1- 
13.1270.10)ASEE Conferences. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement [20] Borenstein J, Howard A. Emerging challenges in AI and the need for AI ethics 
education. AI Ethics 2021;1(1):61–5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-020- 

Nils Knoth: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, 00002-7. 
[21] Borman WC, Motowidlo SJ. Task performance and contextual performance: the 

Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization. Marie meaning for personnel selection research. Hum Perform 1997;10(2):99–109. 
Decker: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Conceptualization. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327043hup1002_3. 
Matthias Carl Laupichler: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, [22] Boyatzis RE. Competencies in the 21st century. J Manag Dev 2008;27(1):5–12. 

https://doi.org/10.1108/02621710810840730. 
Conceptualization. Marc Pinski: Writing – review & editing, Method [23] Bratton, V.K. (2004). Affective morality: the role of emotions in the ethical 
ology, Conceptualization. Nils Buchholtz: Writing – review & editing, decision-making process. https://search.proquest.com/openview/2c634b42ee 
Methodology, Conceptualization. Katharina Bata: Writing – review & 5860606e51b58669ee85ce/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y. 

editing, Methodology, Conceptualization. Ben Schultz: Writing – re [24] Bromme R. Kompetenzen, funktionen und unterrichtliches handeln des lehrers. F. 
E. Weinert (Hrsg.). Enzyklopädie der psychologie: pädagogische psychologie, Bd. 

view & editing. 3: psychologie des unterrichts und der schule. Göttingen: Hogrefe; 1997. 
p. S.177–212. 

Declaration of competing interest [25] Bromme R. Der lehrer als experte: zur psychologie des professionellen Wissens. 
Standardwerke aus psychologie und pädagogik - reprints: band 7. Waxmann; UTB 
GmbH; 2014. https://elibrary.utb.de/doi/book/10.31244/9783830980421. 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial [26] Bühler MM, Jelinek T, Nübel K. Training and preparing tomorrow’s workforce for 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the fourth industrial revolution. Educ Sci 2022;12(11):782. https://doi.org/ 

10.3390/educsci12110782 (Basel). 
the work reported in this paper. [27] Bywater JP, Chiu JL, Hong J, Sankaranarayanan V. The teacher responding tool: 

scaffolding the teacher practice of responding to student ideas in mathematics 
References classrooms. Comput Educ 2019;139(1):16–30. https://www.learntechlib.org/p/ 

209941/. 
[28] Cardona MA, Rodríguez RJ, Ishmael K. Artificial intelligence and the future of 

[1] Ajzen I. From intentions to actions: a theory of planned behavior. J. Kuhl (Ed.). teaching and learning: insights and recommendations. Department of Education; 
Action control: from cognition to behavior. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 1985. 2023. United States, https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metad 
p. 11–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-69746-3_2. c2114121/. 

[2] Ajzen I. The theory of planned behavior. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 1991; [29] Carolus A, Koch MJ, Straka S, Latoschik ME, Wienrich C. MAILS - Meta AI literacy 
50(2):179–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T. scale: development and testing of an AI literacy questionnaire based on well- 

[3] Alexander PA, Jablansky S, Singer LM, Dumas D. Relational reasoning. Policy founded competency models and psychological change- and meta-competencies. 
Insights Behav Brain Sci 2016;3(1):36–44. https://doi.org/10.1177/ Comput Hum Behav Artif Hum 2023;1(2):100014. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
2372732215622029. chbah.2023.100014. 

[4] Alexander PA, Judy JE. The interaction of domain-specific and strategic [30] Casal-Otero L, Catala A, Fernández-Morante C, Taboada M, Cebreiro B, Barro S. 
knowledge in academic performance. Rev Educ Res 1988;58(4):375–404. Ai literacy in K-12: a systematic literature review. Int J STEM Educ 2023;10(1): 
https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543058004375. 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-023-00418-7. 

[5] Alekseeva L, Azar J, Giné M, Samila S, Taska B. The demand for AI skills in the [31] Cetindamar D, Kitto K, Wu M, Zhang Y, Abedin B, Knight S. Explicating AI 
labor market. Labour Econ 2021;71:102002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. literacy of employees at digital workplaces. IEEE Trans Eng Manag 2024;71: 
labeco.2021.102002. 810–23. https://doi.org/10.1109/tem.2021.3138503. 

[6] Allen, J.P., & van der Velden, R.K.W. (2005). The role of self-assessment in [32] Chan CK, Chen SW. Students’ perceptions on the recognition of holistic 
measuring skills. https://cris.maastrichtuniversity.nl/en/publications/the-role- competency achievement: a systematic mixed studies review. Educ Res Rev 2022; 
of-self-assessment-in-measuring-skills. 35:100431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2021.100431. 

[7] Ali L. The design of curriculum, assessment and evaluation in higher education [33] Chiu TKF. The impact of Generative AI (GenAI) on practices, policies and research 
with constructive alignment. J Educ E Learn Res 2018;5(1):72–8. https://eric.ed. direction in education: a case of ChatGPT and Midjourney. Interact Learn Environ 
gov/?id=ej1173088. 2023:1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2023.2253861. 

[8] Allport GW. Attitudes. A handbook of social psychology. Clark University Press; [34] Chiu TKF, Meng H, Chai CS, King I, Wong S, Yam Y. Creation and evaluation of a 
1935. p. 798–844. pretertiary artificial intelligence (AI) curriculum. IEEE Trans Educ 2022;65(1): 

[9] Anderson LW, Krathwohl DR. A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: a 30–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TE.2021.3085878. 
revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of educational objectives. Longman; 2001 [35] Chiu TK. Future research recommendations for transforming higher education 
(Abridged ed.). with generative AI. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2024;6:100197. https://doi.org/ 

[10] Anthonysamy L, Koo AC, Hew SH. Self-regulated learning strategies in higher 10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100197. 
education: fostering digital literacy for sustainable lifelong learning. Educ Inf [36] Chiu TK, Xia Q, Zhou X, Chai CS, Cheng M. Systematic literature review on 
Technol 2020;25(4):2393–414. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-020-10201-8 opportunities, challenges, and future research recommendations of artificial 
(Dordr). intelligence in education. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2023;4:100118. https://doi. 

[11] Graesser AC, VanLehn K, Rose CP, Jordan PW, Harter D. Intelligent tutoring org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100118. 
systems with conversational dialogue. AI Mag 2001;22(4):39. https://doi.org/ [37] Choi SW, Lim S, van der Linden WJ. TestDesign: an optimal test design approach 
10.1609/aimag.v22i4.1591. to constructing fixed and adaptive tests in R. Behaviormetrika 2022;49:191–229. 

[12] Audrin C, Audrin B. Key factors in digital literacy in learning and education: a https://doi.org/10.1007/s41237-021-00145-9. 
systematic literature review using text mining. Educ Inf Technol 2022;27(6): [38] Cialdini RB, Petty RE, Cacioppo JT. Attitude and attitude change. Annu Rev 
7395–419. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-021-10832-5 (Dordr). Psychol 1981;32(1):357–404. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev. 

[13] Baartman LK, de Bruijn E. Integrating knowledge, skills and attitudes: ps.32.020181.002041. 
conceptualising learning processes towards vocational competence. Educ Res Rev [39] Coeckelbergh M. Artificial intelligence, responsibility attribution, and a relational 
2011;6(2):125–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2011.03.001. justification of explainability. Sci Eng Ethics 2020;26(4):2051–68. https://doi. 

org/10.1007/s11948-019-00146-8. 

11



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

[40] Crawford K. The atlas of AI: power, politics, and the planetary costs of artificial [67] Gruber H, Harteis C, Rehrl M. Professional learning: erfahrung als grundlage von 
intelligence. Yale University Press; ProQuest; 2021. handlungskompetenz. Bild Erzieh 2006;59(2):193–204. https://doi.org/ 

[41] Dalton-Brown S. The ethics of medical AI and the physician-patient relationship. 10.7788/bue.2006.59.2.193. 
Camb Q Healthc Ethics CQ 2020;29(1):115–21. https://doi.org/10.1017/ [68] Gruber H, Mandl H. Expertise und erfahrung. H. Gruber & A. Ziegler (Eds.). 
S0963180119000847. The International Journal of Healthcare Ethics Expertiseforschung: theoretische und methodische Grundlagen. VS Verlag für 
Committees. Sozialwissenschaften; 1996. p. 18–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-663- 

[42] Davis M. Integrating ethics into technical courses: micro-insertion. Sci Eng Ethics 12111-4_2. Imprint. 
2006;12(4):717–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-006-0066-z. [69] Grybauskas A, Stefanini A, Ghobakhloo M. Social sustainability in the age of 

[43] Dell’Acqua, F., McFowland, E., Mollick, E.R., Lifshitz-Assaf, H., Kellogg, K., digitalization: a systematic literature review on the social implications of industry 
Rajendran, S., Krayer, L., Candelon, F., & Lakhani, K.R. (2023). Navigating the 4.0. Technol Soc 2022;70:101997. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jagged technological frontier: field experimental evidence of the effects of AI on techsoc.2022.101997. 
knowledge worker productivity and quality. 10.2139/ssrn.4573321. [70] Haefner N, Parida V, Gassmann O, Wincent J. Implementing and scaling artificial 

[44] Dellermann D, Ebel P, Söllner M, Leimeister JM. Hybrid intelligence. Bus Inf Syst intelligence: a review, framework, and research agenda. Technol Forecast Soc 
Eng 2019;61(5):637–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00595-2. Change 2023;197:122878. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.122878. 

[45] Dignum V. Responsibleartificial intelligence: how to develop and use AI in a [71] Haidt J. Moral psychology for the twenty-first century. J Moral Educ 2013;42(3): 
responsible way. 1st ed. Springer International Publishing; 2019. https://doi.org/ 281–97. https://doi.org/10.1080/03057240.2013.817327. 
10.1007/978-3-030-30371-6. 2019Artificial Intelligence. [72] Harari YN. Reboot for the AI revolution. Nature 2017;550(7676):324–7. https:// 

[46] DiSessa AA. Changing minds: computers, learning and literacy. The Mit Press; doi.org/10.1038/550324a. 
2001. [73] Hardt M, Narayanan A. Fairness and machine learning: limitations and 

[47] Doris JM. Lack of character: personality and moral behavior. Cambridge opportunities. The MIT Press; 2023. 
University Press; 2002. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139878364. [74] Hashemian G, Loui MC. Can instruction in engineering ethics change students’ 

[48] Drumwright M, Prentice R, Biasucci C. Behavioral ethics and teaching ethical feelings about professional responsibility? Sci Eng Ethics 2010;16(1):201–15. 
decision making. Decis Sci J Innov Educ 2015;13(3):431–58. https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-010-9195-5. 
10.1111/dsji.12071. [75] Haug CJ, Drazen JM. Artificial intelligence and machine learning in clinical 

[49] Durmaz A, Dursun İ, Kabadayi ET. Mitigating the effects of social desirability bias medicine, 2023. N Engl J Med 2023;388(13):1201–8. https://doi.org/10.1056/ 
in self-report surveys. A. Ippolito, C. Inglese, & S. Chakraborty (Eds.). Advances in NEJMra2302038. 
library and information science (ALIS) book series: 2020: 4. Challenges of [76] Hess JL, Beever J, Iliadis A, Kisselburgh LG, Zoltowski CB, Krane MJM, 
globalization and inclusivity in academic research. IGI Global; 2024. p. 146–85. Brightman AO. An ethics transfer case assessment tool for measuring ethical 
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-1025-4.ch007. reasoning abilities of engineering students using reflexive principlism approach. 

[50] Eaton E, Koenig S, Schulz C, Maurelli F, Lee J, Eckroth J, Crowley M, In: Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE frontiers in education conference (FIE). IEEE; 
Freedman RG, Cardona-Rivera RE, Machado T, Williams T. Blue sky ideas in 2014. p. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2014.7044441. 
artificial intelligence education from the EAAI 2017 new and future AI educator [77] Hess JL, Fore G. A systematic literature review of US engineering ethics 
program. AI Matters 2018;3(4):23–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/ interventions. Sci Eng Ethics 2018;24(2):551–83. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
3175502.3175509. s11948-017-9910-6. 

[51] Epstein RM, Hundert EM. Defining and assessing professional competence. JAMA [78] Heyder T, Posegga O. Extending the foundations of AI literacy. In: Proceedings of 
2002;287(2):226–35. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.287.2.226. the ICIS 2021; 2021. https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2021/is_future_work/is_futu 

[52] Ericsson KA. The influence of experience and deliberate practice on the re_work/9. 
development of superior expert performance. K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. [79] Hilbert S, Coors S, Kraus E, Frei M, Lindl A, Wild J, Krauss S, Goretzko D, Bischl B, 
Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.). The Cambridge handbook of expertise and Stachl C. Machine learning for the educational sciences. Rev Educ 2021;9(3): 
expert performance. Cambridge: University Press; 2012. p. 683–704. https://doi. e3310. Sven. 
org/10.1017/CBO9780511816796.038. Repr. [80] Holmes W, Miao F, UNESCO. Guidance for generative AI in education and 

[53] Eslami M, Vaccaro K, Lee MK, Elazari Bar On A, Gilbert E, Karahalios K. User research. UNESCO Publishing; 2023. 
attitudes towards algorithmic opacity and transparency in online reviewing [81] Hornberger M, Bewersdorff A, Nerdel C. What do university students know about 
platforms. S. Brewster, G. Fitzpatrick, A. Cox, & V. Kostakos (Eds.). In: Artificial Intelligence? Development and validation of an AI literacy test. Comput 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. Educ Artif Intell 2023;5:100165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100165. 
ACM; 2019. p. 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300724. [82] Howard J. Artificial intelligence: implications for the future of work. Am J Ind 

[54] Faruqe, F., Watkins, R., & Medsker, L. (2021). Competency model approach to AI Med 2019;62(11):917–26. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.23037. 
literacy: research-based path from initial framework to model. http://arxiv.org/ [83] Jacob SR, Warschauer M. Computational thinking and literacy. J Comput Sci 
pdf/2108.05809.pdf. Integr 2018;1(1). https://doi.org/10.26716/jcsi.2018.01.1.1. 

[55] Fast E, Horvitz E. Long-term trends in the public perception of artificial [84] Jang Y, Choi S, Kim H. Development and validation of an instrument to measure 
intelligence. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. 31; undergraduate students’ attitudes toward the ethics of artificial intelligence (AT- 
2017. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v31i1.10635. EAI) and analysis of its difference by gender and experience of AI education. Educ 

[56] Fisher DM, Good S, Toich MJ, Schutt E. Measuring moral disengagement with a Inf Technol 2022;27(8):11635–67. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11086- 
situational judgment test: advancing the assessment of an important workplace 5 (Dordr). 
construct. Int J Sel Assess 2021;29(1):114–33. https://doi.org/10.1111/ [85] Järvelä S, Nguyen A, Hadwin A. Human and artificial intelligence collaboration 
ijsa.12318. for socially shared regulation in learning. Br J Educ Technol 2023;54(5):1057–76. 

[57] Fraillon J, Ainley J, Schulz W, Friedman T, Duckworth D. Preparing for life in a https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13325. 
digital world: IEA international computer and information literacy study 2018 [86] Johnston B, Webber S. Information literacy in higher education: a review and 
international report. 1st ed. Springer International Publishing; 2020. https://doi. case study. Stud High Educ 2003;28(3):335–52. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
org/10.1007/978-3-030-38781-5. 2020. 03075070309295. 

[58] Fütterer T, Fischer C, Alekseeva A, Chen X, Tate T, Warschauer M, Gerjets P. [87] Kandlhofer M, Steinbauer G, Hirschmugl-Gaisch S, Huber P. Artificial intelligence 
Chatgpt in education: global reactions to AI innovations. Sci Rep 2023;13(1): and computer science in education: from kindergarten to university. In: 
15310. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-42227-6. Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE frontiers in education conference (FIE). IEEE; 2016. 

[59] Gal I. Adults’ statistical literacy: meanings, components, responsibilities. Int Stat p. 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2016.7757570. 
Rev 2002;70(1):1. https://doi.org/10.2307/1403713. [88] Kasneci E, Sessler K, Küchemann S, Bannert M, Dementieva D, Fischer F, 

[60] Ghallab M. Responsible AI: requirements and challenges. AI Perspect 2019;1(1): Gasser U, Groh G, Günnemann S, Hüllermeier E, Krusche S, Kutyniok G, 
1–7. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42467-019-0003-z. Michaeli T, Nerdel C, Pfeffer J, Poquet O, Sailer M, Schmidt A, Seidel T, 

[61] Gillath O, Ai T, Branicky MS, Keshmiri S, Davison RB, Spaulding R. Attachment Kasneci G. ChatGPT for good? On opportunities and challenges of large language 
and trust in artificial intelligence. Comput Hum Behav 2021;115:106607. https:// models for education. Learn Individ Differ 2023;103:102274. https://doi.org/ 
doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2020.106607. 10.1016/j.lindif.2023.102274. 

[62] Gilster P. Digital literacy. New York: Wiley Computer Publications; 1997. [89] Katz D. The functional approach to the study of attitudes. Public Opin Q 1960;24: 
[63] Graesser AC, Hu X, Sottilare R. Intelligent tutoring systems. F. Fischer, C. E. 163. https://doi.org/10.1086/266945. 2, Special Issue: Attitude Change. 

Hmelo-Silver, S. R. Goldman, & P. Reimann (Eds.). International handbook of the [90] Khakurel J, Penzenstadler B, Porras J, Knutas A, Zhang W. The rise of artificial 
learning sciences. Routledge; 2018. p. 246–55. https://doi.org/10.4324/ intelligence under the lens of sustainability. Technologies 2018;6(4):100. https:// 
9781315617572-24. doi.org/10.3390/technologies6040100 (Basel). 

[64] Grassini S. Development and validation of the AI attitude scale (AIAS-4): a brief [91] Kieslich K, Keller B, Starke C. Artificial intelligence ethics by design. Evaluating 
measure of general attitude toward artificial intelligence. Front Psychol 2023;14: public perception on the importance of ethical design principles of artificial 
1191628. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1191628. intelligence. Big Data Soc 2022;9(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/ 

[65] Greenhill AT, Edmunds BR. A primer of artificial intelligence in medicine. Tech 20539517221092956. 205395172210929. 
Innov Gastrointest Endosc 2020;22(2):85–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. [92] Kligyte V, Marcy RT, Waples EP, Sevier ST, Godfrey ES, Mumford MD, 
tgie.2019.150642. Hougen DF. Application of a sensemaking approach to ethics training in the 

[66] Greeno JG, Riley MS, Gelman R. Conceptual competence and children’s counting. physical sciences and engineering. Sci Eng Ethics 2008;14(2):251–78. https:// 
Cogn Psychol 1984;16(1):94–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(84) doi.org/10.1007/s11948-007-9048-z. 
90005-7. [93] Kong SC, Cheung W, Zhang G. Evaluation of an artificial intelligence literacy 

course for university students with diverse study backgrounds. Comput Educ Artif 
Intell 2021;2:100026. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100026. 

12



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

[94] Krathwohl DR, Bloom BS, Masia BB. Taxonomy of educational objectives: the J Appl Psychol 2006;91(4):749–61. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021- 
classification of educational goals. 1st ed. David McKay; 1964. 9010.91.4.749. 
reprintedTaxonomy of educational objectives: Handbook 2. [121] Mousavi Baigi SF, Sarbaz M, Ghaddaripouri K, Ghaddaripouri M, Mousavi AS, 

[95] Kruger J, Dunning D. Unskilled and unaware of it: how difficulties in recognizing Kimiafar K. Attitudes, knowledge, and skills towards artificial intelligence among 
one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. J Pers Soc Psychol healthcare students: a systematic review. Health Sci Rep 2023;6(3):e1138. 
1999;77(6):1121–34. https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.77.6.1121. https://doi.org/10.1002/hsr2.1138. 

[96] Kuhail MA, Alturki N, Alramlawi S, Alhejori K. Interacting with educational [122] Murphy, M., Hawwash, K., Vigild, M., & Fouger, X. (2016). Position paper on 
chatbots: a systematic review. Educ Inf Technol 2023;28(1):973–1018. https:// engineering skills: developing graduate engineering skills. European Society for 
doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11177-3 (Dordr). Engineering Education. https://www.sefi.be/publication/position-paper-on-en 

[97] Laupichler MC, Aster A, Haverkamp N, Raupach T. Development of the “Scale for gineering-skills/. 
the assessment of non-experts’ AI literacy” – An exploratory factor analysis. [123] Nagel MT, Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia O, Fischer J. Validation of newly developed 
Comput Hum Behav Rep 2023;12:100338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. tasks for the assessment of generic Critical Online Reasoning (COR) of university 
chbr.2023.100338. students and graduates. Front Educ 2022;7. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 

[98] Laupichler MC, Aster A, Schirch J, Raupach T. Artificial intelligence literacy in feduc.2022.914857 (Lausanne)Article 914857, 914857. 
higher and adult education: a scoping literature review. Comput Educ Artif Intell [124] Navigli R, Conia S, Ross B. Biases in large language models: origins, inventory, 
2022;3:100101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100101. and discussion. J Data Inf Qual 2023;15(2):1–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 

[99] Laupichler MC, Rother JF, Grunwald Kadow IC, Ahmadi S, Raupach T. Large 3597307. 
language models in medical education: comparing ChatGPT- to human-generated [125] Nazaretsky T, Cukurova M, Ariely M, Alexandron G. Confirmation bias and trust: 
exam questions. Acad Med J Assoc Am Med Coll 2023. https://doi.org/10.1097/ human factors that influence teachers’ attitudes towards AI-based educational 
ACM.0000000000005626. Advance online publication. technology. In: Proceedings of the AI for blended-learning: empowering teachers 

[100] Lévy-Leboyer C. La gestion des competences: une démarche essentielle pour la in real classrooms co-located with 16th European conference on technology 
compétitivité des entreprises. Eyrolles; 2009. Nouvelle édition revue et enhanced learning (ECTEL 2021); 2021. https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/ 
augmentéeRessources humaines. 10141423/. 

[101] Lievens F. Construct-driven SJTs: toward an agenda for future research. Int J Test [126] Newberry B. The dilemma of ethics in engineering education. Sci Eng Ethics 2004; 
2017;17(3):269–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/15305058.2017.1309857. 10(2):343–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-004-0030-8. 

[102] Lievens F, Schäpers P, Herde CN. Situational judgment tests: from low-fidelity [127] Ng DTK, Leung JKL, Chu SKW, Qiao MS. Conceptualizing AI literacy: an 
simulations to alternative measures of personality and the person-situation exploratory review. Comput Educ Artif Intell 2021;2:100041. https://doi.org/ 
interplay. A. Slaughter, P. D. Harms, S. J. Read, & D. Wood (Eds.). Measuring and 10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100041. 
modeling persons and situations. Academic Press; 2021. p. 285–311. https://doi. [128] Ng DTK, Leung JKL, Su J, Ng RCW, Chu SKW. Teachers’ AI digital competencies 
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819200-9.00017-X. and twenty-first century skills in the post-pandemic world. Educ Technol Res Dev 

[103] Lindvig K, Ulriksen L. Different, difficult, and local: a review of interdisciplinary ETRD 2023;71(1):137–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-023-10203-6. 
teaching activities. Rev High Educ 2019;43(2):697–725. https://doi.org/ [129] Ng DTK, Wu W, Leung JKL, Chiu TKF, Chu SKW. Design and validation of the AI 
10.1353/rhe.2019.0115. literacy questionnaire: the affective, behavioural, cognitive and ethical approach. 

[104] Livingstone S, van Couvering E. Information literacy. W. Donsbach (Ed.). The Br J Educ Technol 2023. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13411. Article bjet.13411. 
international encyclopedia of communication (1. publ). Wiley; 2008. https://doi. Advance online publication. 
org/10.1002/9781405186407.wbieci021. [130] Ng W. Can we teach digital natives digital literacy? Comput Educ 2012;59(3): 

[105] Lohberger K, Braun E. Comparing learning opportunities of generic skills in 1065–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.04.016. 
higher education to the requirements of the labour market. Front Educ 2022;7: [131] Nguyen NT, Biderman MD, McDaniel MA. Effects of response instructions on 
886307. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2022.886307 (Lausanne)Article 886307. faking a situational judgment test. Int J Sel Assess 2005;13(4):250–60. https:// 

[106] Lohse-Bossenz H, Bloss C, Dörfler T. Constructing multi-theory vignettes to doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2389.2005.00322.x. 
measure the application of knowledge in ambivalent educational situations. Front [132] Nti IK, Adekoya AF, Weyori BA, Nyarko-Boateng O. Applications of artificial 
Educ 2022;7. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2022.996029 (Lausanne)Article intelligence in engineering and manufacturing: a systematic review. J Intell 
996029. Manuf 2022;33(6):1581–601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-021-01771-6. 

[107] Long D, Magerko B. What is AI literacy? Competencies and design considerations. [133] Pereira V, Hadjielias E, Christofi M, Vrontis D. A systematic literature review on 
In: Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing the impact of artificial intelligence on workplace outcomes: a multi-process 
systems. ACM; 2020. p. 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376727. perspective. Hum Resour Manag Rev 2023;33(1):100857. https://doi.org/ 

[108] Long D, Teachey A, Magerko B. Family learning talk in AI literacy learning 10.1016/j.hrmr.2021.100857. 
activities. In: Proceedings of the CHI conference on human factors in computing [134] Pinski M, Benlian A. Ai literacy - towards measuring human competency in 
systems. ACM; 2022. p. 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502091. artificial intelligence. T. X. Bui (Ed.). In: Proceedings of the 56th annual hawaii 

[109] Loughlin C, Lygo-Baker S, Lindberg-Sand Å. Reclaiming constructive alignment. international conference on system sciences: january 3-6, 2023. Department of IT 
Eur J High Educ 2021;11(2):119–36. https://doi.org/10.1080/ Management Shidler College of Business University of Hawaii; 2023. https://hdl. 
21568235.2020.1816197. handle.net/10125/102649. 

[110] Luan H, Geczy P, Lai H, Gobert J, Yang SJH, Ogata H, Baltes J, Guerra R, Li P, [135] Pinski M, Haas M, Franz A. AiLingo – a design science approach to advancing non- 
Tsai CC. Challenges and future directions of big data and artificial intelligence in expert adults’ AI literacy. In: Proceedings of the ICIS 2023; 2023. https://aisel.ais 
education. Front Psychol 2020;11:580820. https://doi.org/10.3389/ net.org/icis2023/learnandiscurricula/learnandiscurricula/10. 
fpsyg.2020.580820. [136] Pinto dos Santos D, Giese D, Brodehl S, Chon SH, Staab W, Kleinert R, Maintz D, 

[111] MacKenzie, Podsakoff. Construct measurement and validation procedures in MIS Baeßler B. Medical students’ attitude towards artificial intelligence: a multicentre 
and behavioral research: integrating new and existing techniques. MIS Q 2011;35 survey. Eur Radiol 2019;29(4):1640–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-018- 
(2):293. https://doi.org/10.2307/23044045. 5601-1. 

[112] MacTurk RH, Morgan GA. Advances in applied developmental psychology: Vol. [137] Ployhart RE, Ehrhart MG. Be careful what you ask for: effects of response 
12. Mastery motivation: origins, conceptualizations, and applications. Ablex Pub; instructions on the construct validity and reliability of situational judgment tests. 
1995. Int J Sel Assess 2003;11(1):1–16. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2389.00222. 

[113] Mason RO. Four Ethical issues of the information age. J. Weckert (Ed.). [138] Prem E. From ethical AI frameworks to tools: a review of approaches. AI Ethics 
International library of essays in public and professional ethics. Computer ethics. 2023;3(3):699–716. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00258-9. 
Routledge; 2017. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315259697-8. [139] Prentice R. Teaching behavioral ethics. J Legal Stud Educ 2014;31(2):325–65. 

[114] McDaniel MA, Hartman NS, Whetzel DL, Grubb WL. Situational Judgement tests, https://doi.org/10.1111/jlse.12018. 
response instructions, and validity: a meta-analysis. Pers Psychol 2007;60(1): [140] Raji ID, Scheuerman MK, Amironesei R. You can’t sit with us. In: Proceedings of 
63–91. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2007.00065.x. the 2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency. ACM; 

[115] Mikalef P, Gupta M. Artificial intelligence capability: conceptualization, 2021. p. 515–25. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445914. 
measurement calibration, and empirical study on its impact on organizational [141] Rajnai Z, Kocsis I. Assessing industry 4.0 readiness of enterprises. In: Proceedings 
creativity and firm performance. Inf Manag 2021;58(3):103434. https://doi.org/ of the 2018 IEEE 16th world symposium on applied machine intelligence and 
10.1016/j.im.2021.103434. informatics (SAMI 2018). IEEE; 2018. p. 225–30. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 

[116] Mishra P, Warr M, Islam R. TPACK in the age of ChatGPT and generative AI. SAMI.2018.8324844. 7-10 February 2018. 
J Digit Learn Teach Educ 2023;39(4):235–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/ [142] Rehm M, Bölsterli K. Entwicklung von unterrichtsvignetten. D. Krüger, I. 
21532974.2023.2247480. Parchmann, & H. Schecker (Eds.). Methoden in der 

[117] Mitchell, J., & Guile, D. (2022). Fusion skills and industry 5.0: conceptions and naturwissenschaftsdidaktischen forschung. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 2014. 
challenges. Chapters. https://ideas.repec.org/h/ito/pchaps/228513.html. p. 213–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37827-0_18. 

[118] Moore RL, Jiang S, Abramowitz B. What would the matrix do? a systematic [143] Rest JR, Narvaez D, Thoma SJ, Bebeau MJ. DIT2: devising and testing a revised 
review of K-12 AI learning contexts and learner-interface interactions. J Res instrument of moral judgment. J Educ Psychol 1999;91(4):644–59. https://doi. 
Technol Educ 2023;55(1):7–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/ org/10.1037/0022-0663.91.4.644. 
15391523.2022.2148785. [144] Salazar-Gomez AF, Bagiati A, Minicucci N, Kennedy KD, Du X, Breazeal C. 

[119] Motowidlo SJ, Dunnette MD, Carter GW. An alternative selection procedure: the Designing and implementing an AI education program for learners with diverse 
low-fidelity simulation. J Appl Psychol 1990;75(6):640–7. background at scale. In: Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE frontiers in education 

[120] Motowidlo SJ, Hooper AC, Jackson HL. Implicit policies about relations between conference (FIE). IEEE; 2022. p. 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
personality traits and behavioral effectiveness in situational judgment items. FIE56618.2022.9962632. 

13



N. Knoth et al.                                                                                                                                                                                          C  o  m  p  u  t e r  s  a  n  d  E  d  u  c a  t i o  n   O  p en 6 (2024) 100177

[145] Sanusi IT, Ayanwale MA, Tolorunleke AE. Investigating pre-service teachers’ [169] Vazhayil A, Shetty R, Bhavani RR, Akshay N. Focusing on teacher education to 
artificial intelligence perception from the perspective of planned behavior theory. introduce AI in schools: perspectives and illustrative findings. In: Proceedings of 
Compu Educ Artif Intell 2024;6:100202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. the 2019 IEEE tenth international conference on technology for education (T4E). 
caeai.2024.100202. IEEE; 2019. p. 71–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/T4E.2019.00021. 

[146] Sanusi IT, Olaleye SA, Oyelere SS, Dixon RA. Investigating learners’ competencies [170] Verghese A, Shah NH, Harrington RA. What this computer needs is a physician: 
for artificial intelligence education in an African K-12 setting. Comput Educ Open humanism and artificial intelligence. JAMA 2018;319(1):19–20. https://doi.org/ 
2022;3:100083. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeo.2022.100083. 10.1001/jama.2017.19198. 

[147] Sanusi IT, Oyelere SS, Vartiainen H, Suhonen J, Tukiainen M. A systematic review [171] Vuorikari, R., Kluzer, S., & Punie, Y. (2022). DigComp 2.2: the digital competence 
of teaching and learning machine learning in K-12 education. Educ Inf Technol framework for citizens - with new examples of knowledge, skills and attitudes. 
2023;28(5):5967–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11416-7 (Dordr). 1018-5593. Advance online publication. 10.2760/490274. 

[148] Schäpers P, Mussel P, Lievens F, König CJ, Freudenstein JP, Krumm S. The role of [172] Walden S, Direito I, Berhan L, Clavero S, Galligan Y, Jolly A. ASEE & SEFI joint 
situations in situational judgment tests: effects on construct saturation, predictive statement on diversity, equity, and inclusion: a call and pledge for action. 
validity, and applicant perceptions. J Appl Psychol 2020;105(8):800–18. https:// American Society for Engineering Education; 2020. https://diversity.asee.org/ 
doi.org/10.1037/apl0000457. wp-content/uploads/2020/05/ASEE-SEFI_DEIStatement.pdf. 

[149] Schepman A, Rodway P. Initial validation of the general attitudes towards [173] Wang B, Rau PLP, Yuan T. Measuring user competence in using artificial 
Artificial Intelligence Scale. Comput Hum Behav Rep 2020;1:100014. https://doi. intelligence: validity and reliability of artificial intelligence literacy scale. Behav 
org/10.1016/j.chbr.2020.100014. & Inf Technol 2022;42(9):1324–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 

[150] Schepman A, Rodway P. The general attitudes towards artificial intelligence scale 0144929X.2022.2072768. 
(GAAIS): confirmatory validation and associations with personality, corporate [174] Wang W, Siau K. Artificial intelligence, machine learning, automation, robotics, 
distrust, and general trust. Int J Hum Comput Interact 2023;39(13):2724–41. future of work and future of humanity. J Database Manag 2019;30(1):61–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2085400. https://doi.org/10.4018/JDM.2019010104. 

[151] Schleiss J, Laupichler MC, Raupach T, Stober S. AI course design planning [175] Weber P, Pinski M, Baum L. Toward an objective measurement of AI literacy. In: 
framework: developing domain-specific AI education courses. Educ Sci 2023;13 Proceedings of the PACIS 2023; 2023. https://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2023/60. 
(9):954. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13090954 (Basel). [176] Weinert FE. Concept of competence: a conceptual clarification. D. S. Rychen & L. 

[152] Schwarz N. Attitude construction: evaluation in context. Soc Cogn 2007;25(5): H. Salganik (Ed.). Defining and selecting key competencies. Hogrefe & Huber 
638–56. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.5.638. Publishers; 2001. p. 45–65. 

[153] Segun ST. Critically engaging the ethics of AI for a global audience. Ethics Inf [177] Weinert FE. Leistungsmessungen in schulen. Beltz; 2002. 
Technol 2021;23(2):99–105. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-020-09570-y. [178] Whetzel D, Sullivan T, McCloy R. Situational judgment tests: an overview of 

[154] Senkbeil M, Ihme JM, Schöber C. Wie gut sind angehende und fortgeschrittene development practices and psychometric characteristics. Pers Assess and Decis 
Studierende auf das leben und arbeiten in der digitalen welt vorbereitet? 2020;6(1). https://doi.org/10.25035/pad.2020.01.001. 
Ergebnisse eines standard setting-verfahrens zur beschreibung von ICT-bezogenen [179] White RW. Motivation reconsidered: the concept of competence. Psychol Rev 
kompetenzniveaus. Z Erziehungswiss 2019;22(6):1359–84. https://doi.org/ 1959;66:297–333. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0040934. 
10.1007/s11618-019-00914-z. [180] Wienrich C, Carolus A. Development of an instrument to measure 

[155] Shih PK, Lin CH, Wu LY, Yu CC. Learning ethics in AI—teaching non-engineering conceptualizations and competencies about conversational agents on the example 
undergraduates through situated learning. Sustainability 2021;13(7):3718. of smart speakers. Front Comput Sci 2021;3:685277. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13073718. fcomp.2021.685277. Article 685277. 

[156] Shin D, Shim J. A systematic review on data mining for mathematics and science [181] Winter SJM, Chudoba K, Gutek BA. Attitudes toward computers: when do they 
education. Int J Sci Math Educ 2021;19(4):639–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/ predict computer use? Inf Manag 1998;34(5):275–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
s10763-020-10085-7. s0378-7206(98)00065-2. 

[157] Sindermann C, Sha P, Zhou M, Wernicke J, Schmitt HS, Li M, Sariyska R, [182] Winterton J, Turnbow T. What is competence? Theory, policy and practice. T. 
Stavrou M, Becker B, Montag C. Assessing the attitude towards artificial Dundon & A. Wilkinson (Eds.). Case studies in work, employment and human 
intelligence: introduction of a short measure in German, Chinese, and English resource management. Edward Elgar Publishing; 2020. p. 123–8. https://doi.org/ 
Language. KI Künstl Intell 2021;35(1):109–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218- 10.4337/9781788975599.00028. 
020-00689-0. [183] Wittig A. Implementing problem based learning through engineers without 

[158] Sit C, Srinivasan R, Amlani A, Muthuswamy K, Azam A, Monzon L, Poon DS. borders student projects. Adv Eng Educ 2013;3(4):1–20. https://advances.asee.or 
Attitudes and perceptions of UK medical students towards artificial intelligence g/publication/implementing-problem-based-learning-through-engineers-witho 
and radiology: a multicentre survey. Insights Imaging 2020;11(1):14. https://doi. ut-borders-student-projects/. 
org/10.1186/s13244-019-0830-7. [184] Wolff A, Gooch D, Cavero Montaner JJ, Rashid U, Kortuem G. Creating an 

[159] Sophian C. Beyond competence: the significance of performance for conceptual understanding of data literacy for a data-driven society. J Community Inform 
development. Cogn Dev 1997;12(3):281–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0885- 2016;12(3). https://doi.org/10.15353/joci.v12i3.3275. 
2014(97)90001-0. [185] Wong SC. Competency definitions, development and assessment: a brief review. 

[160] Spante M, Hashemi SS, Lundin M, Algers A. Digital competence and digital Int J Acad Res Progress Educ Dev 2020;9(3):95–114. https://hrmars.com/index. 
literacy in higher education research: systematic review of concept use. Cogent php/IJARPED/article/view/8223/Competency-Definitions-Development-and- 
Educ 2018;5(1):1519143. https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2018.1519143. Assessment-A-Brief-Review. 

[161] Stemler SE, Sternberg RJ. Using situational judgment tests to measure practical [186] Xu JJ, Babaian T. Artificial intelligence in business curriculum: the pedagogy and 
intelligence. Situational judgment tests. Psychology Press; 2013. p. 107–31. learning outcomes. Int J Manag Educ 2021;19(3):100550. https://doi.org/ 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203774878-7. 10.1016/j.ijme.2021.100550. 

[162] Stolpe K, Hallström J. Artificial intelligence literacy for technology education. [187] Younis HA, Eisa TAE, Nasser M, Sahib TM, Noor AA, Alyasiri OM, Salisu S, 
Comput Educ Open 2024;6:100159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Hayder IM, Younis HA. A systematic review and meta-analysis of artificial 
caeo.2024.100159. intelligence tools in medicine and healthcare: applications, considerations, 

[163] Suh W, Ahn S. Development and validation of a scale measuring student attitudes limitations, motivation and challenges. Diagnostics 2024;14(1):109. https://doi. 
toward artificial intelligence. Sage Open 2022;12(2). https://doi.org/10.1177/ org/10.3390/diagnostics14010109. 
21582440221100463. 215824402211004. [188] Yu A, Douglas JA. IRT models for learning with item-specific learning parameters. 

[164] Swanson L, Stocking ML. A model and heuristic for solving very large item J Educ Behav Stat 2023;48(6):866–88. https://doi.org/10.3102/ 
selection problems. Appl Psychol Meas 1993;17(2):151–66. https://doi.org/ 10769986231193096. 
10.1177/014662169301700205. [189] Zawacki-Richter O, Marín VI, Bond M, Gouverneur F. Systematic review of 

[165] Touretzky D, Gardner-McCune C, Martin F, Seehorn D. Envisioning AI for K-12: research on artificial intelligence applications in higher education – where are the 
what should every child know about AI?. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference educators? Int J Educ Technol High Educ 2019;16(1):1–27. https://doi.org/ 
on artificial intelligence. 33; 2019. p. 9795–9. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai. 10.1186/s41239-019-0171-0. 
v33i01.33019795. [190] Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia O, Brückner S, Nagel MT, Bültmann AK, Fischer J, 

[166] Tricot A, Sweller J. Domain-specific knowledge and why teaching generic skills Schmidt S, Molerov D. Performance Assessment and digital training framework 
does not work. Educ Psychol Rev 2014;26(2):265–83. https://doi.org/10.1007/ for young professionals’ generic and domain-specific online reasoning in law, 
s10648-013-9243-1. medicine, and teacher practice. J Supranatl Polic Educ JoSPoE 2021;(13):9–36. 

[167] Tully, S., Longoni, C., & Appel, G. (2023). Knowledge of artificial intelligence https://doi.org/10.15366/jospoe2021.13.001. 
predicts lower AI receptivity. 10.31234/osf.io/t9u8g. [191] Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia O, Pant HA, Greiff S. Assessing generic and domain- 

[168] van Harreveld F, Nohlen HU, Schneider IK. The ABC of ambivalence. J. M. Olson specific academic competencies in higher education. Z Pädagog Psychol 2019;33 
& M. P. Zanna (Eds.). Advances in experimental social psychology, 52. Academic (2):91–3. https://doi.org/10.1024/1010-0652/a000236. 
Press; 2015. p. 285–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.aesp.2015.01.002. 

14